# Organic sulfur fluxes and geomorphic control of sulfur isotope ratios in rivers 

Preston C. Kemeny ${ }^{\mathrm{a}, *}$, Mark A. Torres ${ }^{\mathrm{b}}$, Michael P. Lamb ${ }^{\mathrm{a}}$, Samuel M. Webb ${ }^{\mathrm{c}}$,<br>Nathan Dalleska ${ }^{a}$, Trevor Cole ${ }^{b}$, Yi Hou ${ }^{b}$, Jared Marske ${ }^{a}$, Jess F. Adkins ${ }^{a}$,<br>Woodward W. Fischer ${ }^{\mathrm{a}}$<br>${ }^{a}$ Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, United States of America<br>b Earth, Environmental, and Planetary Sciences, Rice University, Houston, TX, United States of America<br>${ }^{\text {c }}$ Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA, United States of America

## A R T I C L E I N F O

Article history:
Received 28 August 2020
Received in revised form 2 February 2021
Accepted 16 February 2021
Available online 4 March 2021
Editor: L. Derry
Keywords:
chemical weathering
pyrite oxidation
sulfur isotopes
XANES
Iceland


#### Abstract

A B S T R A C T Pyrite oxidation plays a critical role in the relationship between weathering and climate, and its impact on the global carbon cycle has previously been constrained through inversion models utilizing observations of river sulfate $\left(\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right)$ and its ${ }^{34} \mathrm{~S} /{ }^{32} \mathrm{~S}$ isotope ratio ( $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO4}}$ ). However, measurements from some rivers have suggested that $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO} 4}$ can be substantially impacted by processes such as microbial sulfate reduction and/or sulfur assimilation and cycling, rather than simply reflecting a weighted mixture of lithologic sulfur sources. To study the prevalence and controls on $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ transformations, we measured dissolved major element concentrations and $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO} 4}$ in river water samples from throughout western Iceland. Our analyses focused on samples from a small catchment hosting the Efri Haukadalsá river, a system with relatively uniform and isotopically constrained basaltic bedrock. We also measured sediment $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ and sulfur speciation using sulfur K-edge $X$-ray absorption spectroscopy on sediment and vegetation samples from this catchment. Values of dissolved $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO} 4}$ in the Efri Haukadalsá ranged from $2.5 \%$ to $23.7 \%$ and had a linear relationship with $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ ratios, indicating that $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ predominantly derived from basalt weathering and meteoric precipitation. The lower $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO} 4}$ values were found in fluvial valleys with V-shaped cross sections, while higher values of $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO} 4}$ occurred in U-shaped, glacially eroded valleys with thick alluvial fills blanketing the valley floor. Spectroscopic observations identified organic sulfur phases in suspended river sediment, floodplain deposits, and vegetation. Mass balance calculations quantified the organic sulfur flux as less than $10 \%$ of $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ export, and sediment $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ values were comparable to river $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO4}}$. We interpreted these isotopic and chemical patterns as reflecting differences in the availability of unweathered bedrock across the Efri Haukadalsá catchment, with Vshaped valleys having greater access to fresh sulfide-bearing minerals than alluviated U-shaped valleys; this interpretation is in contrast to one in which the elevated $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO} 4}$ values reflect fractionation during sulfur transformations along alluvial reaches. These results validated the application of river inversion models for constraining weathering fluxes and affirmed that pyrite oxidation globally, even in the presence of river sulfur cycling, modulates the abundance of atmospheric carbon dioxide.


(c) 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

## 1. Introduction

Chemical weathering regulates the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide $\left(\mathrm{CO}_{2}\right)$ by sourcing alkalinity and dissolved inorganic carbon into the coupled ocean-atmosphere system (Walker et al., 1981). While weathering of silicate minerals

[^0]https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2021.116838
0012-821X/© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.


[^0]:    * Corresponding author.

    E-mail addresses: pkemeny@caltech.edu, preston.kemeny@gmail.com (Preston C. Kemeny).





Fig. 1. Schematic of the global sulfur cycle. River $\left[\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right]$ and $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{2}}$ have been used to quantify chemical weathering reactions and the associated biogeochemical fluxes of alkalinity and dissolved inorganic carbon in rivers globally. Additionally, river $\left[\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right]$ and $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{4}}$ have been used to constrain the abundance and ${ }^{34} \mathrm{~S} /{ }^{32} \mathrm{~S}$ ratio of $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ input to seawater, which are key parameters in biogeochemical models interpreting geologic records of $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ and $\delta^{13} \mathrm{C}$ (Kump and Garrels, 1986). However, rivers may host fractionating processes such as dissimilatory microbial $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2_{-}}$reduction or $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2_{-}}$assimilation that could bias the results of river inversion calculations and biogeochemical models. The given range of river $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\text {РО }^{2}}$ values is from Burke et al. (2018), gypsum $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ was assumed to span the ${ }^{34} \mathrm{~S} /{ }^{32} \mathrm{~S}$ range of Phanerozoic evaporites, the $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ of igneous sulfide was assumed to match bulk terrestrial sulfur, and the range of fractionations associated with MSR was estimated from laboratory culture studies.

Quantifying the role of $\mathrm{FeS}_{2}$ oxidation during weathering requires apportioning measurements of river sulfate $\left(\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right)$ between multiple sources such as meteoric precipitation, evaporite dissolution, and hydrothermal fluids (Gaillardet et al., 1999; Burke et al., 2018). This attribution often relies on inversion models that assume dissolved river chemistry reflects conservative mixing of a limited number of end-members with constrained elemental and isotopic compositions. However, researchers have suggested that microbial sulfate reduction (MSR) and $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ assimilation may alter the abundance and/or ${ }^{34} \mathrm{~S} /{ }^{32} \mathrm{~S}$ isotope ratio of fluvial $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ ( $\left.\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{2}}\right)$ during transport (Fig. 1). Evidence of MSR impacting $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\text {so4 }}$ comes from the Marsyandi River in the Nepal Himalaya, where researchers found coherent relationships among the concentration of sulfate $\left(\left[\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right]\right)$, the value of $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\text {so4 }}$, and the major and minor oxygen isotope ratios of $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ (Turchyn et al., 2013; Hemingway et al., 2020). More broadly, sulfur is an important nutrient for the terrestrial biosphere (Kertesz and Mirleau, 2004) and sulfur cycling associated with plant uptake and growth or the recycling of plant-derived biomass within soils and the rhizosphere might engender small but meaningful isotopic fractionations (Trust and Fry, 1992; Tcherkez and Tea, 2013). If biological transformations lead to substantial changes in $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{4}}$ then ${ }^{34} \mathrm{~S} /{ }^{32} \mathrm{~S}$ isotope ratios may not faithfully record weathering processes, affecting estimates of $\mathrm{FeS}_{2}$ oxidation.

Microbial sulfate reduction is expected to increase residual river $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}}{ }^{4}$ to values above the primary lithologic sources of sulfur. Were such a process widespread, this increase would force river inversion models to calculate larger contributions from high- $\delta^{34}$
end-members such as evaporites and meteoric precipitation, with the effect of underestimating the importance of terrestrial $\mathrm{FeS}_{2}$ oxidation. Moreover, measurements of river $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{2}}$ form an important boundary condition for global isotope mass balance models involving the sulfur cycle and its connections to carbon cycling and atmospheric dioxygen (Kump and Garrels, 1986). If values of river $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\text {РО }^{2}}$ are elevated due to microbial activity these models may be systematically biased towards reconstructing lower fractions of $\mathrm{FeS}_{2}$ burial across geologic time.

Evaluating the importance of in-catchment sulfur cycling requires quantifying the relative export and storage of organic and inorganic sulfur. Export of inorganic sulfur as species other than $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$, such as detrital minerals or gaseous $\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{~S}$, is unexpected in oxygenated surface environments based on both theoretical calculations of mineral oxidation kinetics (Johnson et al., 2014) and direct observations of atmospheric gases (Andreae et al., 1990). The greater stability of organosulfur species (Xia et al., 1998) suggests that particulate and dissolved organic phases may provide a reduced sulfur flux, yet direct observations are currently lacking. Identifying sulfur transformations from existing dissolved data is complicated by the presence of multiple weathering lithologies in most catchments, each of which may carry a variable range of $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ values (Calmels et al., 2007; Kemeny et al., 2020).

In this work we studied weathering, sediment transport, and sulfur cycling in river catchments of western Iceland. Due to the catchments' relatively uniform basaltic bedrock lithology, fluvial sulfur transformations were expected to be easier to diagnose than in catchments containing diverse lithologies. Our approach was further bolstered by previous work on the ${ }^{34} \mathrm{~S} /{ }^{32} \mathrm{~S}$ isotope ratio of Icelandic rocks (Sakai et al., 1980; Torssander, 1989; Hildebrand and Torssander, 1998; Stefánsson et al., 2015) and prior measurements of $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\text {so4 }}$ in Icelandic rivers (Gislason and Torssander, 2006; Robinson et al., 2009).

## 2. Methods

### 2.1. Field sites

River water and sediment samples were collected from the Efri Haukadalsá river catchment and surrounding region during two field campaigns in August 2016 and July-August 2019 (Fig. 2; Appendix A, Figs. A.1, A.2, and A. 3 for drone imagery and field photographs). Carbon analyses from the 2016 field season, including ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ dates, $\delta^{13} \mathrm{C}$ measurements, and estimates of the amount of alluvial fill in the catchment, were previously reported in Torres et al. (2020).

The Efri Haukadalsá is a meandering river constructing a prograding delta as it drains into lake Haukadalsvatn (Fig. 2C). A sediment core from Haukadalsvatn containing glacial dropstones and marine mollusk shells below finely laminated lacustrine sediment indicated that the catchment deglaciated $\sim 13 \mathrm{ka}$ and was only briefly marine before reflecting the deposits from the active fluvial-deltaic-lacustrine source-to-sink system (Geirsdóttir et al., 2009). The $170 \mathrm{~km}^{2}$ Efri Haukadalsá catchment does not currently contain glaciers. The catchment lies within late Miocene (5.3-11 Ma) basaltic and intermediate extrusive rocks, although a small exposure of silicic rock is reported in the headwaters of tributary 3
(Hjartarson and Sæmundsson, 2014) (Fig. 2). The Efri Haukadalsá catchment is far from Iceland's primary hydrothermal axis and current volcanic or hydrothermal inputs are expected to be negligible;





Fig. 2. Sampling sites. (A) Iceland with indicated study region and relevant meteorological stations (orange squares). Coastline data were sourced from the European Environment Agency in EPSG 3035. (B) Western Iceland with river water sampling locations (white circles). Boxed regions show the Efri Haukadalsá catchment and the Hvítá catchment. Elevation data were sourced from the Icelandic Land Survey in EPSG 3057. (C) The Efri Haukadalsá catchment with indicated sampling locations for river water samples (white circles), deposit samples (red triangles), suspended sediment samples (purple pentagons), and vegetation samples (green diamonds, locations approximate). The location of a moraine is indicated. Tributaries are numbered following Torres et al. (2020). (D) The Hvítá catchment with indicated sampling locations. Elevation data for the Efri Haukadalsá and Hvítá catchments were sourced from the Polar Geospatial Center in EPSG 3413. Note that the north arrow rotates between panels due to change of projection. (For interpretation of the colors in the figure(s), the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
no visual indicators of hydrothermal activity were observed. The presence of calcite and zeolites in vugs suggests that some basalt beds may have previously been hydrothermally altered, although such features could also have formed through groundwater influences. Porosity is largely sealed in this region due to secondary mineralization, causing surface runoff to dominate over groundwater flow (Gislason et al., 1996). Vegetation in the catchment is currently dominated by grasses and sedges, but site names indicate that the region was previously forested (Geirsdóttir et al., 2009).

The Efri Haukadalsá is alluvial for much of its length, but with bedrock exposures in some tributaries, and is mostly gravelbedded, but with a transition to sand-bedding near Haukadalsvatn (Torres et al., 2020). The lower section of the mainstem Efri Haukadalsá has a U-shaped cross section and the channel is alluvial in this lower valley, meandering across a floodplain approximately 600-800 m wide (Fig. 2C). This channel and floodplain material are part of a relatively thick alluvial fill that is likely the result of fluvial and lacustrine deposition following deglaciation (Geirsdóttir et al., 2009; Torres et al., 2020). Several steep tributaries branch from the lower section of the Efri Haukadalsá mainstem. Tributaries 1 and 2 enter the mainstem near Lake Haukadalsvatn and upstream of the lower reach, respectively (Figs. 2C, A.1). A major split in the Efri Haukadalsá occurs about halfway upstream, after which both branches curve in parallel toward the southeast.
The lower branch of the split, tributary 3, is a hanging valley off the mainstem, separated by a steep knickzone. On the basis of dissolved chemistry, we calculated that tributary 3 supplied $26 \pm 7 \%$ $(2 \sigma)$ of the water flow downstream of the confluence. Tributaries 1,2 , and 3 tended to have only a thin cover of sediment, typical of bedrock rivers, and lacked the thick alluvial fill of the lower mainstem valley. In the upper branch of the split, there is a moraine along tributary 5 (Fig. 2C, pink outline). Two bedrock knickpoints occur in the Efri Haukadalsá mainstem, the first near the confluence with tributary 3 and the second near the site of sediment input from the moraine. Emergent springs with conspicuous iron oxide deposits were identified throughout the catchment, which we refer to as "Fe springs" (Fig. A.2F). River water samples were classified on the basis of either location (mainstem, tributary, lake), notable geomorphologic features (draining the moraine), or visual indicators of chemistry (Fe springs).

Thirty-two additional water samples from outside of the Efri Haukadalsá catchment were collected during the 2016 field campaign (Fig. 2B) which we refer to as "NW rivers", and seven additional water samples from five sites along the Hvítá river and its tributaries were sampled from a catchment draining the Langjökull and Eiríksjökull glaciers during the 2019 field season (Fig. 2D). The former sampling sites were more coastal than the Efri Haukadalsá and included catchments with increased exposures of felsic lithologies (Gislason et al., 1996; Hjartarson and Sæmundsson, 2014); this shift in underlying lithology is expected to impact dissolved ion concentrations but have little impact on $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}_{4}}$ (Torssander,





Fig. 3. Cation and anion ternary diagrams. Plotted data are ratios of charge-equivalent concentrations uncorrected for $\mathrm{Cl}^{-}$inputs from precipitation, and the plotted regions are subsets of the full parameter space (as indicated in the schematic to the top-right above each panel: filled white triangles are plotted areas and the grey triangles indicate the full space). (A) Cation ternary diagram of $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+}-\mathrm{Mg}^{2+}-\mathrm{Na}^{+}-\mathrm{K}^{+}$for all samples. River waters from the Efri Haukadalsá tended to have higher $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+} / \Theta^{+}$and lower $\left(\mathrm{Na}^{+}-\mathrm{K}^{+}\right) / \Theta^{+}$than samples from NW Iceland or from the Hvítá catchment. All river water samples plotted away from a mixing line between basalt and annuallyintegrated precipitation (grey line), indicating depletion in $\mathrm{Mg}^{2+} / \Theta^{+}$relative to two-component mixing. As previously suggested (Gislason et al., 1996) and supported by inversion modeling with Monte Carlo error propagation (Appendix E, Figs. E.1, E.2), we attributed this depletion to the formation of secondary clays. Three precipitation samples lacking measurements of $\Theta^{+}$were not plotted. (B) Anion ternary diagram of $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}-\mathrm{Cl}^{-}-\mathrm{HCO}_{3}^{-}$for all samples. The anion $\mathrm{HCO}_{3}^{-}$, quantified through charge balance, was the dominant anion in solution. The ion $\mathrm{Cl}^{-}$was the second most abundant anion and samples from NW Iceland were enriched in $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \Theta^{+}$relative to samples from the Efri Haukadalsá, consistent with their elevated values of $\left(\mathrm{Na}^{+}-\mathrm{K}^{+}\right) / \Theta^{+}$. Most samples had $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-} / \Theta^{+}<12 \%$ (eq/eq). The anion $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ comprised a larger fraction of charge in precipitation samples (blue diamonds in top-right schematic). One precipitation sample with $\left(\mathrm{Cl}^{-}+\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right) / \Theta^{+}>1$ was not plotted. The anion data were largely consistent with mixing between basalt and annually-integrated precipitation.



Fig. 4. $\delta^{34} \mathrm{SSO}_{4},\left[\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right]$, and $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ of river water samples. (A) $\delta^{34} \mathrm{SSO}_{4}$ decreased with increasing $\left[\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right]$. (B) $\delta^{34} \mathrm{SSO}_{4}$ was linear with $1 / \mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$, excluding samples from Fe springs. (C) $\delta^{34} \mathrm{SSO}_{4}$ against $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{SO}^{2-}$. The data were well described by mixing between a low- $\delta^{34}$ S end-member and a high- $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ end-member, proposed to be basalt and precipitation, respectively. Note that the end-members of the mixing line (grey) were independently constrained and not fit through our river water measurements. The plotted basalt end-member had $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ ranging from $-2 \%$ to $1 \%$ and $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ between 0 and 2 (Sakai et al., 1980; Torssander, 1989). The precipitation end-member had $\delta^{34} \mathrm{SSO}_{4}$ derived from our observations and the precipitation intensity recorded at the Ásgarður and Stykkishólm meteorological stations, and $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ based on the observed chemistry of precipitation at the Í чаfoss meteorological station (Appendix D). Several precipitation samples are out of the plotting range in (B) and three Fe springs samples with elevated $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ ratios are out of range in (C). Prior observations of river $\delta^{34} \mathrm{SSO}_{4}$ and Langjökull $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ are from Gislason and Torssander (2006).
against $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ (Fig. 4C). Repeat sampling of the Efri Haukadalsá indicated that river $\delta^{34} \mathrm{SSO}_{4}$ was largely constant in time (Appendix H, Table H.1); conversely, we identified slight temporal changes in the dissolved chemistry of Haukadalsvatn (Appendix I).

The sulfur content of floodplain deposits ranged from 0.025 wt. $\%$ to $1.01 \mathrm{wt} . \%$ and sediment $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ values ranged from 11.1\% to $17.8 \%$ (Fig. 5). With the exception of the organic carbon-rich site LHSS-07 and the site LHSS-04, sediment $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ values were relatively constant at a single location while sulfur contents were variable across samples (Fig. 5A, 5B). At LHSS-07, sulfur contents were relatively uniform across samples while $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ values ranged from $12.6 \%$ to $17.8 \%$. Sediment $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ values were poorly corre-





Fig. 5. Sediment $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$. (A) ${ }^{34} \mathrm{~S} /{ }^{32} \mathrm{~S}$ isotope ratio by sampling location. Numbers refer to sediment sampling sites, which are coded by plotting symbol, and multiple points per symbol reflect vertical sampling. Markers with black edges indicate the ground surface or river surface; markers with white edges below these indicate depth below surface, while markers with white edges above these indicate height above the river. Points that would otherwise overlap are partially offset from one another; true sampling locations are plotted in Fig. 2C. (B) Sediment ${ }^{34} \mathrm{~S}{ }^{32} \mathrm{~S}$ ratio against inverse sulfur content. Except for LHSS-07 and LHSS-04, samples from the same site generally had similar $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ values but variable sulfur abundances. At LHSS-07, all samples had high sulfur abundances but variable ${ }^{34} \mathrm{~S} /{ }^{32} \mathrm{~S}$ ratios. (C) Sediment $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ against fraction modern ( ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ content) color-coded by $\delta^{13} \mathrm{C}$. There was no clear relationship between sediment $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ value and ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ content. The fraction modern of the sample from the moraine (LHSS-06) had a value of 0.27 and is not plotted.
lated with ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ abundance and only weakly related to $\delta^{13} \mathrm{C}$ values (Fig. 5C).

X-ray absorption spectra revealed a range of organic sulfur moities in suspended sediment, deposit samples, and vegetation (Fig. 6A). Flourscence peaks corresponding to organic disulfide (e.g. oxidized glutathione), thiol, sulfoxide, sulfonate, and sulfate moities were observed across vegetation, suspended sediment, and deposit samples (Fig. 6B).

## 4. Discussion

### 4.1. Source of ions to river water

The linear trend defined by $\delta^{34} S_{\mathrm{SO} 4}$ and $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ (Fig. 4C) was consistent with two end-member mixing, where $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ in the Efri Haukadalsá was predominantly sourced from a low- $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$, low $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ end-member and a high $-\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$, high $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ endmember. We proposed that the low- ${ }^{34} \mathrm{~S} /{ }^{32} \mathrm{~S}$ end-member was basalt and the high- ${ }^{34} \mathrm{~S} /{ }^{32} \mathrm{~S}$ end-member was annually-integrated precipitation, where the latter reflected the sum of distinct summertime and wintertime meteoric inputs (Appendix D; Torssander, 1989; Gislason et al., 1996; Moulton et al., 2000; Gislason and Torssander, 2006; Bern et al., 2015).

The $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ value of Icelandic basalt ranges from approximately $-2 \ \%$ to $2.5 \%$ with a mean value of $-0.5 \pm 2.4 \%$ ( $2 \sigma$ ) (Sakai et al., 1980; Torssander, 1989; Hildebrand and Torssander, 1998). The

 sulfur abundance (Torssander, 1989). The sulfur content of Icelandic basalt is approximately $150 \pm 160 \mathrm{ppm}(1 \sigma$ ) (Sakai et al., 1980; Torssander, 1989) and the chlorine content is approximately 235 $\pm 140 \mathrm{ppm}(1 \sigma$ ) (Sigvaldason and Óskarsson, 1976), giving an expected $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ molar ratio of approximately 1.4.

We calculated a molar $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ ratio of 14.9 and $\delta^{34} S_{S O_{4}}$ value of $18.5 \%$ for annually-integrated precipitation based on our samples of summer precipitation, prior observations of precipitation chemistry at the Írafoss meteorological station, and prior observations of precipitation intensity at the Ásgarður and Stykkishólm meteorological stations (Figs. 2A, 2B; Appendix D, Figs. D.1-D.4).





Fig. 6. X-ray spectroscopy results and fitting. XANES identified reduced and oxidized sulfur moieties in suspended sediment, deposit sediment, and vegetation samples. (A) Example X-ray absorption spectra from (1) blank filter, (2,5) deposit samples, (3) vegetation, and (4) suspended sediment. The statistics $F_{\text {reduced }}$ quantified the contribution of thiol, disulfide, and sulfoxide to each spectra relative to the contributions of all moieties. (B) Top-down view of X-ray absorption spectra. Within each category, spectra are organized with higher $F_{\text {reduced }}$ values at the top to lower $F_{\text {reduced }}$ values at the bottom. The spectra showed peaks at incident energies characteristic of the resonances for reduced sulfur phases such as disulfide, thiol, and sulfoxide. (C) Stacked bar chart showing the fractional contributions of sulfate, sulfonate, sulfoxide, disulfide, and thiol to spectra collected on vegetation, suspended sediment, deposit samples, and blank filters. (D) Fractional contributions arranged by moiety. Thiols made a large contribution to spectra collected on vegetation, while sulfonates made a large contribution to the spectra collected on suspended sediment and deposit samples. Shaded boxes extend from the $25^{\text {th }}$ to $75^{\text {th }}$ percentiles of results.

Approximately $70-80 \%$ of this annual precipitation was estimated to fall outside of the summer months with $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{Na}^{+}, \mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$, $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{Mg}^{2+}$, and $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ ratios similar to seawater. The remaining fraction of annual precipitation was estimated to fall from May through August with decreased $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ and $\mathrm{Cl}^{-} / \mathrm{Ca}^{2+}$ ratios compared to seawater values (Appendix D, Figs. D.1-D.4).

A river mixing model with Monte Carlo error propagation confirmed that dissolved $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ was predominantly sourced from basalt and wintertime precipitation, with a secondary contribution from summertime precipitation (Appendix E, Figs. E.1, E.2). Allowing for formation of a secondary phase with relatively low $\mathrm{Na}^{+} / \div^{+}$and elevated $\mathrm{Ca}^{2+} / \Sigma^{+}$and $\mathrm{Mg}^{2+} / \Sigma^{+}$ratios recreated our observations of dissolved cation ratios. The results of our inversion model were thus consistent with prior observations of secondary clay formation in Icelandic catchments (Gislason et al., 1996; Thorpe et al., 2019).

### 4.2. Catchment geometry regulated pyrite oxidation

The fraction of $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ sourced from basalt or from seasonal precipitation in river water samples from the Efri Haukadalsá displayed spatial structure linked to landscape processes (Fig. 7; Appendix G, Fig. G.1). Overall, $\left[\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right]$ was low (Fig. 7A) and $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO} 4}$ values were high (Fig. 7B) in samples from the catchment headwaters and the upper mainstem river, implying that precipitation was the dominant source of $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ to these samples. Conversely, water samples from tributaries 1, 2, and 3 had high values of $\left[\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right]$ and low values of $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO} 4}$, reflecting that basalt weathering was the dominant source of $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ to these samples. Samples from the lower mainstem river had intermediate $\left[\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right]$ and $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO} 4}$ values reflecting a mixture of water derived from the headwaters and from the tributaries.

Values of $\left[\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right]$ and $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO4}}$ were related to the geometry of valley cross sections upstream of each sampling site (Figs. 7, 8). In the mainstem lower valley, downstream of the confluence with tributary 3 , cross sections were U-shaped (Figs. 7D, 7E, 8A, 8F; Appendix F, Fig. F.1), reflecting glacial erosion, with a flat floor defined by postglacial floodplain alluvium. In these reaches the valley bottom has been substantially filled with alluvium, reflecting the progradation and aggradation of the fluvial-deltaic-lacustrine system as it adjusts to the bedrock topography left by glaciation





Fig. 7. Spatial structure of $\left[\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right]$ and $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{4}}$. Maps of (A) $\left[\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right]$ and (B) $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{4}}$. Values of $\left[\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right]$ were elevated and $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{4}}$ values were low in samples from tributaries 1,2 and 3, while values of $\left[\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}\right]$ were low and $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{4}}$ values were elevated in samples from the upper section of the mainstem river. In the lower section of the mainstem, $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ and $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{4}}$ had intermediate values. (C) Shaded regions indicate the locations of cross sections show in (D)-(O), where thin colored lines are individual elevation profiles and black lines are averaged cross sections. Averaged cross sections in regions (D)-(H) appeared dominantly U-shaped, consistent with alluviation and higher $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{4}}$ values. Regions $(\mathrm{I})-(\mathrm{O})$ appeared dominantly V-shaped, consistent with fluvial incision and lower $\delta^{34}{ }^{3} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{4}}$ values. Cross sections in (D)-(O) are presented after both horizontal and vertical alignment.
(Torres et al., 2020). Satellite and drone imagery revealed that the river is meandering through its floodplain deposits in this region, with little connection to bedrock on the steep valley walls (Appendix A, Figs. A.1, A.2, A.3). Above the first knickzone (Fig. 9) the valley cross sections again resembled glacially carved valleys, but with a more parabolic valley floor suggesting less sediment accumulation (Fig. 7F, 7G). We interpreted that $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ in these sites was dominantly sourced from precipitation because bedrock is not exposed on the riverbed, there is likely little fresh $\mathrm{FeS}_{2}$ in the floodplain deposits, and the floodplain disconnects the river from hillslope bedrock sources. Although the isotopic composition of dissolved $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ in the lower valley was lower than precipitation, the ${ }^{34} \mathrm{~S}$-depletion is explained by mixing of $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ with high $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}{ }_{\mathrm{SO}^{4}}$ values from the upper section of the catchment with $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ with low $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{4}}$ values from tributaries 1,2 , and 3 .

In contrast to the U-shaped valleys, the cross sections of tributary 1 (Fig. 7I), tributary 2 (Fig. 7J), and tributary 3 (Fig. 7K) displayed evidence for fluvial bedrock incision. For tributary 1, the river topographic profile was very steep (Fig. 9), and the valley was strongly V-shaped (Figs. 7I, 8A, 8F), suggesting fluvial incision into bedrock. For tributary 3 (Fig. 8K), the V-shaped portion of the profile was occasionally within a larger U-shaped cross section, indicative of fluvial incision following the glacial carving of the valley (Montgomery and Korup, 2011), and there was a prominent bedrock knickzone in the lower portion of the valley. Satellite imagery and field photography showed that the V-shaped valley walls have some landslide scarring and deposits that extend to the valley floor, indicating active bedrock erosion and delivery of rock to the riverbed (Appendix A, Fig. A.3). Within these incising reaches, $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{4}}$ values indicated that $\mathrm{SO}_{4}^{2-}$ was dominantly sourced from fresh basalt, a pattern consistent with exposure of fresh minerals as the rivers erode into unweathered bedrock. Overall, lower $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{4}}$ values were associated with higher fractions of V -shaped cross sections (Fig. 8K) and lower power law exponents (Fig. 8L; Appendix F, Fig. F.1); these observations partially led us to conclude that landscape morphology exerted the primary control on dissolved $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}_{\mathrm{SO}^{4}}$.

Above their knickzones, the upper mainstem valley and tributary 3 had similar elevation profiles (Fig. 9) and drainage areas, raising the question of why the two valleys had different crosssectional geometries. Our results suggested, despite that Iceland was covered by an ice sheet during the last glacial maximum (Gudmundsson, 1997), that tributary 3 and the other V-shaped valleys were not shaped by glaciers to the same degree as the main valley. The orientation of the primary U-shaped valley in the Efri Haukadalsá catchment was interpreted to show ice flow was locally to the southwest, whereas some of the V-shaped tributaries were approximately orthogonal to this direction (Fig. 7). We proposed that the orientation of the V-shaped fluvial valleys sheltered them from ice flow and led to the preservation of their shape despite glaciation (Montgomery and Korup, 2011; Lajeunesse, 2014). Following deglaciation, these valleys maintained their steep valley walls and bedrock floors, allowing for continued bedrock incision and hillslope-channel coupling. In contrast, we interpreted that the valleys oriented parallel to the ice flow experienced major glacial erosion and were cut down such that less eroded tributaries became hanging tributaries (Fig. 9) (MacGregor et al., 2000). The low valley-floor gradients and undulating bedrock topography





Fig. 8. Geomorphic analyses. (A) Each of 405 cross sections generated throughout the Efri Haukadalsá catchment was visually inspected and assigned into one of five groups: U-shaped with flat bottom, U-shaped, V-shaped, V-within-U shaped, and N/A. (B) Aligned and averaged cross sections identified as U-shaped with flat bottom (C) U-shaped with rounded bottom, (D) V-shaped, and (E) V-in-U shaped. Results in (A) through (E) are plotted for one of three rounds of manual classification, all of which yielded similar spatial distributions of cross section geometry and averaged elevation profiles. (F) Power law exponent fitted to each cross section, with examples for four different values of the shape parameter $r$ : (G) 2.5, (H) 1.5, (I) 1, (J) 0.5 (Allen et al., 2018). (K) Values of $\delta^{34} \mathrm{SSO}_{4}$ against the fraction of V-shaped cross sections in each catchment, color-coded by median catchment angle. Error bars indicate the minimum and maximum fraction of V-shaped cross sections in each catchment across the three rounds of manual identification, and accounting for cross sections characterized as N/A. Overall, results indicated lower values of $\delta^{34} \mathrm{SSO}_{4}$ in samples with higher fractions of V-shaped cross sections upstream of the sampling site. The sample from tributary 6 was notable for having a high $\delta^{34} \mathrm{SSO}_{4}$ value despite its upstream region being dominated by V-shaped cross sections. (L) Values of $\delta^{34} \mathrm{SSO}_{4}$ against the average power law exponent $r$ upstream of each sampling site. Error bars indicate the range in power law exponent calculated for two different treatments of the elevation data. Again, lower values of $\delta^{34} \mathrm{SSO}_{4}$ were associated with V-shaped upstream cross sections.





Fig. 10. Relationships among fitted spectroscopic data, fraction modern $\left({ }^{14} \mathrm{C}\right.$ content), $1 / \mathrm{S}$ and C/S ratios, and sediment $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$. (A) $F_{\text {reduced }}$ (the sum of fractional contributions from disulfide, thiol, and sulfoxide speciation) derived from X-ray absorption spectra and from (B) multiple-energy maps against fraction modern, shape-coded as deposit samples (squares) or suspended sediment (triangles) and color-coded by the fractional contribution of sulfonate. Within each sample type, lower fraction modern was associated with more reduced speciation and a lower contribution of sulfonate. (C) Fractional contribution of sulfonate against fraction modern, from X-ray absorption spectra and from (D) multiple energy maps, color-coded by the fractional contribution of thiols. Within each sample type, the lower fractional contribution from sulfonate with decreasing ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ content was related to increasing fractional contribution of thiols. Note that changes in the relative contributions of moieties are not independent due to the unit-sum constraint of our fitting; decreases in the relative contribution of sulfonate must be balanced by increases in the fractional contribution of other moieties, even if all other moieties have the same absolute contributions. (E) $1 / \mathrm{S}$ and ( F ) $\mathrm{C} / \mathrm{S}$ molar ratio against fraction modern, color-coded by $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$. Sediment ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ content was only weakly related with $1 / \mathrm{S}$ or $\mathrm{C} / \mathrm{S}$ ratio. In all panels the moraine sample from site LHSS-06 was out of plotting range and excluded from regression.

### 4.4. Sulfur cycling during floodplain storage

X-ray absorption spectra revealed a substantial range in the relative contributions of thiol, disulfide, sulfoxide, sulfonate, and sulfate to suspended sediment, deposit samples, and vegetation (Fig. 6C). On average, the fractional sum of contributions from ${ }^{r e d u c e d}$ sulfur moieties $\left(F_{\text {reduced }}\right)$ to deposit samples was similar between deposit samples stored within the floodplain ( $25.1 \pm 51.6 \%$, $2 \sigma$ ) and sediment suspended in the river $(28.9 \pm 17.3 \%, 2 \sigma)$. One sample from LHSS-07 at 25 cm depth, a horizon with elevated organic carbon content, appeared as an outlier from other deposit samples by showing a large contribution from disulfide (Fig. 6). Moreover, multiple-energy maps indicated that a wide diversity of sulfur speciation was present across spatial scales (Torres et al., 2020). These observations were consistent with prior observations of organic sulfur phases within natural soils (Xia et al., 1998; Solomon et al., 2011; Prietzel et al., 2011).

The mean $F_{\text {reduced }}$ value in vegetation samples, as derived from spectra, was $56.2 \pm 16.8 \%$ ( $2 \sigma$ ). This value was consistent with results of Jalilehvand (2005), who measured X-ray absorption spectra at the sulfur K-edge on plant leaves from northern California. Redox imaging of photosynthetic tissues of grasses and sedges from the Efri Haukadalsá catchment identified spatial diversity in sulfur speciation. For example, the outer photosynthetic mesophyll tissue of sample LHVS19-01 was S-rich and relatively reduced, while the inner parts richer in vasculature were lower in sulfur content and more oxidized (Appendix C, Fig. C.1).

The relative abundances of disulfide, sulfoxide, and sulfate were similar across suspended sediment, deposit samples, and vegetation (Fig. 6D). However, large changes were identified in the relative contributions of thiol and sulfonate moieties between the different materials. Thiols were abundant in vegetation, while sulfonate moieties were rare. Conversely, suspended sediment and deposit samples displayed abundant sulfonate but only a small contribution from thiols. Prior studies have observed a similar abundance of sulfonate species in soils, suggesting it is a recalcitrant form of organic sulfur capable of resisting long-term oxidation compared to more reactive species (Autry and Fitzgerald, 1990; Solomon et al., 2011).

If $\mathrm{S}_{\text {org }}$ in deposit and suspended sediment was mostly derived from plant material, as suggested by the similarity of sediment $\delta^{34} \mathrm{~S}$ and dissolved $\delta^{34} \mathrm{SSO}_{4}$, our observations indicated that the processes of generating, transporting, and storing sediment involved net conversion of thiols into sulfonates. However, we did not recover a positive relationship between ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ abundance in sediment and the fractional contribution of reduced moieties to X-ray absorption spectra (Fig. 10). For both deposit and suspended samples, older sediment was associated with higher $F_{\text {reduced }}$ values
(Figs. 10A, B) and a lower fractional contribution from sulfonate specifically (Figs. 10C, D), patterns opposite of expectations if the aging process generated sulfonate from thiol.

Boye et al. (2017) suggested that carbon-bearing phases with redox states above a thermodynamic threshold were preferentially oxidized within anaerobic settings while reduced carbon-bearing phases were preferentially stored in floodplains. Our data displayed older ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ ages associated with carbon that had a more reduced organic sulfur speciation in sediment (Fig. 10) and suggested that a similar explanation may pertain to our sulfur observations. In this case, the oxidized phases such as sulfonate would have been preferentially lost from the floodplain. We observed that the $1 / \mathrm{S}$ and C/S ratios of samples were not clearly correlated with ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ age, suggesting that, under this interpretation, carbon and sulfur would have been preferentially oxidized at similar rates through time (Fig. 10E, F). However, because the radiocarbon content of sediment reflects a complex mixture of time-dependent physical reworking processes and the addition of newly fixed $\mathrm{C}_{\mathrm{org}}$, we stress that ${ }^{14} \mathrm{C}$ content only approximately represents deposit age (Torres et al., 2017, 2020).



