Basingstoke, Hampshire, England) supplemented with   $0.6\%$   yeast extract

 (Difco) (TSA-YE or TSB-YE) or brain heart infusion (BHI) agar or broth

 (Oxoid). Plasmid pKSV7, used for SOEing PCR, was a kind gift from Kathryn Boor, Cornell University, Ithaca, N.Y. Plasmids pNZ8048 (8) and pNZ9530 (21) were gifts from Michiel Klee re be z em, NIZO, Ede, The Netherlands. Plasmid pNZ44 (29) was a gift from Stephen McGrath, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.  

Growth in the presence of nisin.  The rates of growth of  $L$  . monocytogenes LO28 and LO28 ' lisK  in the presence of different levels of nisin   $\it{.2\%}$   inoculum in TSB-YE containing 50, 100, 150, 200, or   $300\ \upmu\mathrm{g}$   of nisin powder [Sigma, St. Louis,  $\mathrm{Mo.]/mol}$  ) were compared by monitoring optical density at  $600\;\mathrm{nm}\left(\mathrm{OD}_{600}\right)$  with a Spectra Max 340 spectrophotometer (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, Calif.) over a 20-h period.  

Antibiotic assays.  Assays to determine the sensitivities of LO28 and LO28 ' lisK  to a wide range of antibiotics were carried out by agar diffusion. Overnight cultures were diluted to   $10^{6}\mathrm{\CFU/mol}$   and swabbed onto TSA-YE. Commercially purchased disks (  $.6\,\mathrm{\mm}$   in diameter; Oxoid) containing  $30~\upmu\mathrm{g}$  (unless otherwise stated) of the antibiotics to be studied were then placed on the surfaces of agar plates. Following overnight incubation of the plates at  $37^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  , the diameters of the zones of bacterial growth inhibition surrounding the ﬁlter disks were measured. The relative s usc ep tibi li ties of different strains to the various antibiotics tested were correlated with the sizes of the zones of inhibition, with increased zone size reﬂecting increased susceptibility. Initially the antibiotics assayed were cefotaxime, cefuroxime, vancomycin, erythromycin, kanamycin, fosfomycin   $(50~\upmu\mathrm{g})$  ), mino cyclin e, polymyxin B   $(300~\upmu\mathrm{g})$  ), streptomycin   $(25~\upmu\mathrm{g})$  ), fusidic acid   $(10\ \upmu\mathrm{g})$  ), oxy tetracycline, penicillin   $(10\ \upmu\mathrm{g})$  , c linda my c in   $(10\ \upmu\mathrm{g})$  ), s pectin o my c in   $(25~\upmu\mathrm{g}_{\lambda}$  ), ampicillin   $(25~\upmu\mathrm{g})$  ), novobiocin, rifampin, nalidixic acid, gentamicin, colistin sulfate   $(25~\upmu\mathrm{g}_{\lambda}$  ), chlo ramp he nicol (CAM), and tetracycline.  

In addition to this assay, designed to compare antibiotic s usc ep tibi li ties in general, further studies involved disks containing antibiotics of the cephalosporin family. These were cefuroxime, cefta zi dime, cefaclor, c ep halo thin, cefoxitin, cef tria x one, cefotetan, cef opera zone, cephradine, cephalexin, and cefotaxime (all  $30~\upmu\mathrm{g}_{e}$  ).  

Implementation of the nisin-controlled expression (NICE) system in  L. monocytogenes  LO28  lisK .  A strategy to replace the hemolysin gene,  $h y$  , on the  $L$  . monocytogenes  chromosome with the  nisRK  genes was devised. Primers were designed to amplify the chromosomal regions ﬂanking the  $h y$   gene (primers HSOEA, -B, -C, and -D; Table 1). The resultant A-B and C-D fragments were spliced by overlap extension PCR (19) using primers HSOEA and -D to create a single A-D fragment, representing the region surrounding  hly  but with the gene precisely removed. This fragment was subsequently cloned in temperature-sensitive plasmid pKSV7 (41). Since primers B and C have built-in restriction sites, we were able to clone the  nisRK  operon (ampliﬁed, by using primers nisRF and nisKB, from pNZ9530 [21]) into the location formerly occupied by  hly . This plasmid construct, pCPL-53, was electro po rated into  $L$  . monocytogenes LO28 ' lisK , and transform ants were selected on BHI agar with  $10\;\upmu\mathrm{g}$   of  $\mathrm{CAM/ml}$  (BHI/CAM). Chromosomal integration of the plasmid at  $41^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$   was selected by serial passage of a transform ant in prewarmed BHI/CAM broth and streaking onto prewarmed BHI/CAM agar. Plasmid excision was accomplished by continuous passage in BHI at  $30^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  , and clones in which  nisRK  had replaced  hly  on the chromosome were identiﬁed by plating them onto blood agar plates at   $30^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  . Replica plating of non he mol y tic colonies onto BHI and BHI/CAM at  $30^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  identiﬁed cured derivatives. PCR and sequencing analysis of one such strain conﬁrmed that the  nisRK  operon had replaced the  hly  gene. This strain was designated LO28 ' lisK -NICE.  

Over expression of  lisR .  PCR primers NZlisRF (containing the  lisR  start codon) and NZlisRB (containing the  lisR  stop codon) with incorporated  Nco I and  Xba I sites, respectively, were used to amplify  lisR  from LO28. The resultant PCR product was digested with  Nco I and  Xba I restriction enzymes (Roche) and cloned into similarly digested pNZ8048, resulting in the generation of a translational fusion between the nisin-inducible  nisA  promoter on pNZ8048 and the lisR  gene. This event was conﬁrmed by sequence analysis. This strain was designated LO28 ' lisK -NICE(pNZ8048- lisR ). pNZ8048 was also introduced into the LO28 ' lisK -NICE background to create LO28 ' lisK -NICE(pNZ8048). As an alternative to inducible over expression,  lisR  (ampliﬁed by primer pair NZlisRF and NZlisRB) was also cloned into plasmid pNZ44, a derivative of pNZ8048 in which the  $\mathrm{{P_{vis}}}$   promoter was replaced by a constitutive   $\mathrm{P_{44}}$   promoter (29), resulting in the creation of LO28 ' lisK (pNZ44- lisR ). LO28 ' lisK (pNZ44) was also created to serve as a control for subsequent experiments.  

RT-PCR.  RNA isolation and reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) were carried out as described previously (6). RNA was isolated from overnight cultures (constitutive over expression system) or following nisin induction (inducible overexpression system). For induction with nisin cultures were grown to an  $\mathrm{{OD_{600}}}$   of 0.2 and preinduced with  $4.5~\upmu\mathrm{g}$   of nisin powder  $\mathrm{{'m l}}$   for  $^{\textrm{\scriptsize1h}}$  , followed by induction with  $45~\upmu\mathrm{g}$   of nisin powder/ml (a concentration at which there is no difference in the nisin sensitivities of the two strains) for  $30~\mathrm{min}$   and then isolation of RNA. In all cases cDNA was ampliﬁed by PCR with speciﬁc primers and samples were taken at regular intervals and run on agarose gels. Primers for the 16S rRNA of L. monocytogenes  LO28 were used as controls (36).  

Nisin resistance of the   lisK  mutant.  Because deletion of the  $L$  . monocytogenes  histidine kinase-encoding gene,  lisK , results in an altered response to environmental parameters (5), we examined the susceptibility of    $L$  . monocytogenes  to the l antibiotic nisin. It was found that the levels of nisin required to inhibit growth of wild-type LO28 are high relative to those required to inhibit the growth of a number of other grampositive bacteria (9). This is a feature of this strain which we have previously observed in relation to other bac ter ioc in s such as lacticin 3147 and enterocin A (our unpublished data). Growth curves were carried out to determine whether deletion of  lisK  affected the response to nisin. In the absence of nisin the growth rates of the parent and mutant strains were identical, but in the presence of increasing levels of nisin differences became apparent, primarily manifested as a sign i cant ly longer lag phase in wild-type LO28 (Fig. 1). This is most obvious when one observes that the lag period for LO28 in the presence of  $300~\upmu\mathrm{g}$   of   $\mathrm{\Deltan i s i n/m l}$   is   $6\textup{h}$   longer than that for LO28 ' lisK  (Fig. 1E). There is no difference in the growth rates once the lag phase has been exited (e.g., both are   $\mathrm{0.046\U/h}$   during logarithmic growth in the presence of   $200~\upmu\mathrm{g}$   of nisin/ml). Therefore, the LisK mutation results in a culture that is able to rapidly initiate growth in the presence of nisin, whereas the parent apparently needs a signiﬁcant period in which to adapt to the presence of the inhibitor. We speculate that, during prior growth in the absence of nisin, the LisRK system plays a role in creating a particular cell envelope composition that renders the cell more susceptible to nisin (and also alters its  