# Correlation   between   test   temperature,   applied   load and   wear   transition   of   Mg97Zn1Y2   alloy  

J.   An ∗ ,   Y.X.   Tian ,   C.Q.   Feng  

Key   Laboratory   of   Automobile   Materials,   Ministry   of   Education,   Department   of   Materials   Science   and   Engineering,   Jilin   University, Changchun   130025,   PR   China  

Received   25   November   2019;   received   in   revised   form   8   January   2020;   accepted   13   February   2020 Available   online   xxx  

# Abstract  

Dry   sliding   wear   tests   were   performed   on    $\mathrm{Mg97Zn1Y}2$    alloy   at   various   temperatures   of   20,   50,   100,   150   and    $200\,^{\circ}\mathbf{C}$    using   a   pin-on-disc wear   testing   machine   in   order   to   reveal   mild-severe   (M-S)   wear   transition   mechanism   during   elevated-temperature   wear   testing.   It   was   shown that   at   each   test   temperature,   the   wear   rate   increased   with   increasing   load,   and   all   wear   rate-load   curves   demonstrated   two   distinct   stages i.e.   mild   and   severe   wear   stages.   The   predominant   wear   mechanisms   operating   in   mild   and   severe   wear   stages   were   analyzed,   and   they were   indicated   in   the   mild   and   severe   wear   regimes   of   a   wear   mechanism   transition   map,   respectively.   M-S   wear   transition   mechanism   was analyzed   by   comparison   of   microstructure   transformation   and   hardness   change   in   subsurfaces   of   samples   tested   in   mild   and   severe   wear   stages, from   which   M-S   wear   transition   mechanism   was   conﬁrmed   as   softening   of   surface   material   arising   from   dynamic   recrystallization   (DRX) microstructure   transformation.   The   M-S   wear   transition   load   was   found   to   have   a   linear   relationship   with   test   temperature,   and   decreased with   rising   test   temperature.   M-S   wear   transition   obeyed   a   critical   surface   DRX   temperature   (SDT)   criterion   under   given   conditions,   and   the transition   loads   were   estimated   at   various   test   temperatures   by   using   the   criterion.  

$\copyright$   2020   Published   by   Elsevier   B.V.   on   behalf   of   Chongqing   University.  

Peer   review   under   responsibility   of   Chongqing   University  

Keywords:   Mg-alloys;   Elevated   temperatures;   Wear   rate;   Wear   mechanism;   Wear   transition.  

# 1.   Introduction  

Among   Mg-based   alloys,  $\mathrm{Mg97Zn}1\mathrm{Y}2$    (in   atomic   ratio)   al- loy   is   possibly   the   most   attractive   one   owing   to   its   outstanding mechanical   properties   at   both   room   and   elevated   temperatures and   a   special   type   of   structure   phase,   i.e.   long-period   stack- ing   ordered   (LPSO)   phase   [1-5] .   Kawamura   et   al.   [6]   pro- duced   a   high-strength  $\mathrm{Mg97Z n1Y}2$    alloy   using   rapidly   solid- iﬁed   powder   metallurgy   (RS/PM)   technology   in   2001.   The alloy   presented   high   yield   strength   of    $600\,\mathrm{MPa}$    at   room   tem- perature   and    $510\,\mathrm{MPa}$    at    $150\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  C.   The   LPSO   structure   phase  $\mathrm{X}\mathrm{-}\mathrm{Mg}_{12}\mathrm{ZnY}$    was   thought   to   contribute   a   lot   to   the   strength- ening   of   RS/PM    $\mathrm{Mg97Zn1Y}2$    alloy   besides   the   strengthen- ing   of   ﬁne-grained   Mg   matrix   of    $100{-}200\,\mathrm{nm}$    in   diameter. Thereafter,   numerous   efforts   have   been   devoted   to   under- standing   of   every   aspect   of   LPSO   structure   phases.   In   recent years   other   unique   characteristics   of   LPSO   structure   phases have   also   been   revealed,   such   as   high   thermal   stability   up to    $500\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    kink-band   deformation   mode   and   preventing   ef- fect   on   the   growth   of   deformation   twin   in   Mg   matrix   [7-9] . Therefore,    $\mathrm{Mg97Zn1Y}2$    alloy   is   thought   to   be   more   suitable for   making   structural   components   working   in   both   room   and elevated-temperature   environments   than   conventional   Mg-Al- Zn   (AZ)   alloys,   and   it   is   even   suitable   for   making   wear   com- ponents   such   as   piston,   sliding   bearing   and   low-load   bearing gear.  $\mathrm{Mg97Zn1Y}2$    alloy   also   exhibited   a   much   better   dry   slid- ing   wear   performance   than   the   widely   used   AZ91   alloy   at  $0.785\,\mathrm{m}/\mathrm{s}$    under   room   temperature   condition   [10] .   For   these reasons,   it   is   necessary   to   conduct   research   in   wear   properties and   wear   transition   of    $\mathrm{Mg97Zn1Y}2$    alloy   at   elevated   temper- atures   for   future   practical   applications.   Mg-based   alloys   have been   found   to   display   two   different   types   of   wear   behavior, namely   mild   wear   and   severe   wear.   The   former   is   acceptable  

in   engineering   applications   because   of   its   steady   wear   state, low   wear   rate   and   slight   surface   damage,   while   the   latter   is opposite   [11-17] .  

The   dry   sliding   wear   performance   of    $\mathrm{Mg97Zn1Y}2$    al- loy   at   room   temperature   was   comprehensively   studied   within wide   sliding   velocity   and   load   ranges   [18] .   The   critical   load conditions   for   M-S   wear   transition   at   sliding   velocities   of  $0.5{-}4.0\,\mathrm{m}/\mathrm{s}$    were   also   determined,   which   depicted   a   mild wear   regime   where    $\mathrm{Mg97Zn1Y}2$    alloy   component   could   work safely   at   room   temperature   [19] .   However,   up   to   now,   only few   investigations   have   been   conducted   on   friction   and   wear characteristics   of    $\mathbf{Mg}$  -based   alloys   at   elevated   temperatures, for   the   most   part,   they   focused   on   presenting   the   inﬂuences of   load   and   test   temperature   on   wear   rate   and   identifying   wear mechanisms   [20–26] .   The   more   complicated   problems   asso- ciated   with   M-S   wear   transition   have   not   been   fully   touched, including   M-S   wear   transition   mechanism,   criterion   for   M- S   wear   transition   and   evaluation   of   the   critical   load   or   test temperature   for   M-S   wear   transition.   The   solutions   of   these problems   are   conductive   to   better   understanding   of   M-S   wear transition   mechanism   under   elevated   temperature   conditions, also   beneﬁcial   for   engineering   applications   of    $\mathrm{Mg97Zn1Y}2$  alloy.  

The   objective   of   the   present   study   is   to   investigate   wear performance   of    $\mathrm{Mg97Z n1Y}2$    alloy   under   room   and   elevated temperatures.   The   inﬂuences   of   experimental   parameters   (load and   temperature)   on   wear   rate   and   wear   mechanisms   were demonstrated   under   different   wear   conditions.   These   results were   then   summarized   in   a   wear   mechanism   transition   map. The   microstructure   and   hardness   in   subsurfaces   of   worn   sam- ples   were   further   examined   to   clarify   the   real   reason   for   M- S   wear   transition.   The   correlation   between   test   temperature, load   and   wear   transition   was   ﬁnally   discussed   according   to the   surface   DRX   temperature   (SDT)   criterion   for   M-S   wear transition   presented   by   Liang   et   al.   [12] .  

# 2.   Experimental   details  

# 2.1.   Material  

$\mathrm{Mg97Zn1Y}2$    alloy   was   prepared   by   gravity   casting method.   The   raw   materials   including   high   purity    $\ensuremath\mathrm{{Mg}}$   $(>99.95\,\mathrm{wt.}\%)$    Zn    $(>99.95\,\mathrm{wt.}\%)$    and  $\mathrm{Mg}{-}20\mathrm{Y}$     $(\mathrm{wt.\%})$    mas- ter   alloy   were   ﬁrstly   melted   at    $760\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    and   then   hold   at    $720\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  for   a   period   of   about    $20\ \mathrm{min}$    under   protection   of   a   mixture gas   (  ${\mathrm{CO}}_{2}$  and  $\mathrm{SF_{6}}$  ).   The   melt   was   ﬁnally   poured   in   a   steel   die,   which   yielded   a   cast   ingot   with   a   dimension   of    $95\,\mathrm{mm}$    diam- eter   and    $200\,\mathrm{mm}$    height.   The   optical   microstructure   of   as-cast  $\mathrm{Mg97Zn}1\mathrm{Y}2$    alloy   consisted   of   the   coarse   primary    $\scriptstyle{\alpha-\mathbf{M}\mathbf{g}}$    den- drites   surrounded   by   network   of    $\mathrm{X}\mathrm{-}\mathrm{Mg}_{12}\mathrm{ZnY}$    eutectic   phase, as   shown   in   Fig.   1 .   The   compressive   properties   of   the   alloy were   measured   on   a   MTS810   material   testing   system   as   fol- lows:    $120\,\mathrm{MPa}$    yield   strength,    $207\,\mathrm{MPa}$    compressive   strength and    $17.9\%$    strain   limit.   The   hardness   was   measured   to   be 79HV   on   a   HVS-1000   Vickers   hardness   tester.   The   phase analysis   and   microstructure   examination   of  $\mathrm{Mg97Zn1Y}2$    alloy were   performed   by   means   of   Rigaku   D/MAX   2500   PC   X-ray  

  
Fig.   1.   The   optical   microstructure   of    $\mathrm{Mg97Zn1Y}2$    alloy.  

  
Fig.   2.   MG-2000   high-speed   and   high-temperature   pin-on-disk   type   wear testing   machine.  

diffractometer   (XRD)   and   LEXT-OLS3000   confocal   scanning laser   microscope   (CSLM),   respectively.  

# 2.2.   Elevated-temperature   wear   tests  

Wear   tests   were   carried   out   on   a   MG-2000   high-speed and   high-temperature   pin-on-disc   type   wear   machine   at   tem- peratures   of    ${20}{-}200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    under   unlubricated   sliding   condition. Fig.   2   shows   the   wear   machine   equipped   with   an   electric furnace.   The   test   temperatures   were   controlled   accurately with   error   less   than    $\pm5\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    by   thermocouple.   Other   testing parameters   were   selected   as   follows:   sliding   velocity    $0.5\,\mathrm{m}/\mathrm{s}$  wear   distance    $565\,\mathrm{m}$    wear   track   of   discs    $60\,\mathrm{mm}$    diameter, load   rang   of    $20–360\,\mathrm{N}$    Wear   samples   were   cylindrical   pins   of diameter    $6\,\mathrm{mm}$    and    $13\,\mathrm{mm}$    height.   They   were   wire-electrode machined   from   the   cast   ingot.   The   material   used   for   preparing discs   was   a   middle   carbon   chromium   steel    $50\mathrm{Cr}$  .   The   discs were   heat   treated   to   reach   Vickers   hardness   of    $570\,\mathrm{\;HV}$    by quenching   and   low-temperature   tempering.   The   surfaces   of pins   and   discs   were   prepared   by   grinding   with   SiC   paper   and then   polishing   to   roughness   Ra   about    $0.4\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    The   wear   rate of   pin   was   expressed   by   the   volume   loss   per   unit   sliding   dis- tance.   A   digital   micrometer   with   an   accuracy   of    $0.001\,\mathrm{mm}$  was   used   to   measure   the   height   reduction   of   pins,   and   from which   the   volume   loss   was   obtained.  

Identiﬁcation   of   wear   mechanisms   and   analysis   of   com- positions   of   the   worn   surfaces   were   performed   by   means   of SEM   equipped   with   EDS.   The   friction-induced   microstructure change   in   subsurfaces   of   several   samples   was   examined   un- der   CSLM.   These   samples   were   selected   among   those   tested in   mild   wear   and   severe   wear,   and   then   prepared   by   grinding and   polishing   the   cross   sections   along   the   sliding   direction. The   microhardness   was   measured   across   subsurfaces   of   the selected   samples,   and   then   plotted   as   a   function   of   depth   from surface.  

# 3.   Results   and   discussion  

# 3.1.   Effect   of   applied   load   and   test   temperature   on   wear rates  

Fig.   3   shows   variations   of   wear   rates   of    $\mathrm{Mg97Zn}1\mathrm{Y}2$    alloy with   load   at   various   test   temperatures.   In   the   case   of   slid- ing   wear   at   temperatures   of    ${20}{-100}\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  ,   it   is   observed   from Fig.   3 (a)   that   on   the   one   hand,   wear   rate   increases   on   the whole   with   increasing   load   at   each   test   temperature;   on   the other   hand,   wear   rate   essentially   increases   with   increasing temperature   from   20   to    $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    or   from   20   to    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    under   a given   constant   load.   However,   the   wear   rate   was   even   lower at    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    than   at    $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    in   the   load   range   of    ${20}{-}100\,\mathrm{N}$    When applied   load   was   higher   than    $100\,\mathrm{N}$    the   wear   rate   at    $100\,^{\circ}\mathbf{C}$  started   surpassing   that   measured   at    $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}.$    and   maintained   a plateau   within    $\mathrm{100{-}160\,N}$    The   lower   wear   rate   that   occurred at    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    in   the   load   range   of    ${20}{-100}\,\mathrm{N}$    is   apparently   con- trary   to   popular   expectation   that   higher   test   temperature   usu- ally   lead   to   higher   wear   rate   under   a   constant   load.   These phenomena   will   be   discussed   later   in   Section   3.2   on   the   ba- sis   of   morphological   and   chemical   analyses   of   worn   surfaces. Besides   these   details,   a   common   point   is   also   noted   that   each wear   rate-load   curve   can   be   roughly   divided   into   two   distinct stages   in   terms   of   the   curve   slope.   Wear   rate   moderately   in- creased   in   a   low   slope   with   increasing   load   in   the   ﬁrst   stage, but   rapidly   went   up   in   a   high   slope   in   the   second   stage.   The turning   points   between   the   ﬁrst   and   second   stages   can   be clearly   identiﬁed   from   the   wear   rate   curves.   They   are    $220\,\mathrm{N}$  at    $20\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$     $200\,\mathrm{N}$    at  $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    and    $160\,\mathrm{N}$    at    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  C,   respectively.   In the   case   of   sliding   wear   at   temperatures   of   150   and    $200\,^{\circ}\mathbf{C}$  as   seen   from   Fig.   3 (b),   the   wear   rate   was   generally   higher  

  
Fig.   3.   Variations   in   wear   rate   with   load   at   temperatures   of    ${20}{-100}\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (a) and    $150–200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (b).  

at    $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    than   at    $150\,^{\circ}\mathbf{C}$    within    $20{-}170\,\mathrm{N}.$    and   both   wear rate   curves   also   varied   with   applied   load   in   a   similar   way   to those   at   temperatures   of    ${20}{-100}\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  .   That   is,   they   can   also be   divided   into   two   stages,   i.e.   the   ﬁrst   stages   are   from   20 to    $120\,\mathrm{N}$    at    $150\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    and   from   20   to    $80\,\mathrm{N}$    at    $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}.$    while   the second   stages   begin   from   120   to    $220\,\mathrm{N}$    at    $150\,^{\circ}\mathbf{C}$    and   from   80 to    $200\,\mathrm{N}$    at    $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}.$    respectively.   The   turning   points   between the   ﬁrst   and   second   stages   are    $120\,\mathrm{N}$    at    $150\,^{\circ}\mathbf{C}$    and    $80\,\mathrm{N}$    at  $200\,^{\circ}\mathbf{C}$    respectively.  

These   turning   points   of   wear   rate   curves   can   be   prelimi- narily   postulated   to   be   M-S   wear   transition   points   according to   the   notation   of   M-S   wear   transition   proposed   by   Chen   and Alpas   [11] .   In   addition,   it   is   found   that   at   lower   tempera- tures   of   20   and    $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    the   wear   rates   at   the   turning   points are    $39.8\times10^{-12}\ \mathrm{mm}^{3}\mathrm{m}^{-1}$  ×   and    $45.3\times10^{-12}\ \mathrm{mm}^{3}\mathrm{m}^{-1}$    respec- tively.   They   are   close   to    $39.9\times10^{-12}\ \mathrm{\mm^{3}m^{-1}}$  × ,   the   wear rate   at    $\mathbf{M}.S$    transition   point   for   AZ91D   alloy   under   sliding at    $0.5\,\mathrm{m}/\mathrm{s}$    and   room   temperature   [11] .   Of   course,   the   ﬁnal  

<td><table  border="1"><thead><tr><td><b>Temperature (°C)</b></td><td><b>Load (N)</b></td><td><b>0</b></td><td><b>Mg</b></td><td><b>Zn</b></td><td><b>Y</b></td></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td> 50</td><td>20</td><td>13.09</td><td>78.82</td><td>2.13</td><td>5.76</td></tr><tr><td></td><td> 40</td><td>13.25</td><td>78.79</td><td>2.22</td><td>5.78</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>60</td><td>14.97</td><td>77.97</td><td>2.02</td><td>5.59</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>80</td><td>12.65</td><td>75.68</td><td>2.04</td><td>5.59</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>120</td><td>17.11</td><td>77.45</td><td>1.87</td><td>5.55</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>140</td><td>13.87</td><td>78.55</td><td>1.98</td><td>5.52</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>160</td><td>10.11</td><td>81.62</td><td>2.39</td><td>5.78</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>200</td><td>8.89</td><td>84.28</td><td>1.89</td><td>4.74</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>240</td><td>18.86</td><td>71.00</td><td>1.73</td><td>4.91</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>260</td><td>9.86</td><td>82.15</td><td>2.21</td><td>5.64</td></tr><tr><td>100</td><td>20</td><td>21.42</td><td>71.24</td><td>1.95</td><td>4.99</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>40</td><td>13.34</td><td>78.68</td><td>2.22</td><td>5.70</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>60</td><td>7.46</td><td>83.89</td><td>2.29</td><td>6.32</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>80</td><td>15.60</td><td>76.68</td><td>2.06</td><td>5.49</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>100</td><td>11.17</td><td>80.81</td><td>2.12</td><td>5.94</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>140</td><td>7.84</td><td>83.71</td><td>2.20</td><td>6.29</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>180</td><td>10.78</td><td>81.37</td><td>2.02</td><td>5.85</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>200</td><td>14.29</td><td>77.82</td><td>2.05</td><td>5.72</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>240</td><td>10.27</td><td>81.27</td><td>2.18</td><td>5.76</td></tr><tr><td>200</td><td>20</td><td>16.54</td><td>76.07</td><td>1.99</td><td>5.31</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>40</td><td>7.25</td><td>84.01</td><td>2.29</td><td>6.43</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>60</td><td>10.06</td><td>73.92</td><td>2.04</td><td>5.02</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>80</td><td>8.99</td><td>82.66</td><td>2.14</td><td>6.15</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>120</td><td>3.3</td><td>87.11</td><td>2.59</td><td>6.93</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>170</td><td>6.0</td><td>85.39</td><td>2.35</td><td>6.16</td></tr></tbody></table></td>  

conﬁrmation   of   the   M-S   wear   transition   load   at   each   test   tem- perature   ought   to   be   further   considered   together   with   SEM observation   of   worn   surfaces,   since   it   is   commonly   accepted that   the   beginning   of   severe   plastic   deformation   (SPD)   wear mechanism   for    $\mathbf{M}\mathbf{g}.$  -based   alloys   typically   corresponds   to   M-S wear   transition   at   room   and   elevated   temperatures   [11-23] .  

# 3.2.   Wear   mechanisms   and   wear   mechanism   transition   map  

The   morphological   features   and   compositions   of   worn   sur- faces   were   examined   to   identify   wear   mechanisms   associated with   different   testing   parameters.   The   contents   of   main   ele- ments   on   worn   surfaces   were   detected   by   EDS   and   given   in Table   1 .   SEM   images   of   worn   surfaces   at   100   and    $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    are shown   in   Fig.   4 .   In   the   case   of   sliding   wear   at    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    as   the load   was   increased   from   20   to    $160\,\mathrm{N}$    i.e.   in   the   ﬁrst   stage of   wear   rate-load   curve,   worn   surfaces   demonstrated   a   typi- cal   feature   of   delamination   wear   mechanism.   For   example,   at  $20\,\mathrm{N}.$    delamination   scars   were   observed   together   with   surface cracks,   meanwhile   several   oxide   patches   were   found   at   local- ized   areas   ( Fig.   4 (a)).   The   oxygen   content   reached  $21.42\%$    on the   worn   surface.   At    $80\,\mathrm{N}$    a   few   cracks   became   apparently vertical   to   the   sliding   direction   ( Fig.   4 (b)),   while   the   oxygen content   still   maintained   a   high   level   of    $15.6\%$  .   As   seen   from the   image   of   pin   edge   at   top   right   corner   of   Fig.   4 (b),   the surface   was   not   severely   plastic   deformed   since   no   extruded edge   was   formed.   Delamination   and   surface   oxidation   were the   dominant   wear   mechanisms   in   the   ﬁrst   stage.   When   load was   applied   between   180   and  $240\,\mathrm{N}$    i.e.   in   the   second   stage   of wear   rate-load   curve,   worn   surfaces   exhibited   features   of   se- vere   wear.   For   example,   at    $180\,\mathrm{N}$  N,   surface   material   underwent  

  
Fig.   4.   SEM   images   of   worn   surfaces   under   different   sliding   conditions:   (a)  $20\,\mathrm{N}$    and    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (b)    $80\,\mathrm{N}$    and    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (c)    $180\,\mathrm{N}$    and    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (d)    $200\,\mathrm{N}$    at  $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (e),  $20\,\mathrm{N}$    and    $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (f)  $60\,\mathrm{N}$    and  $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (g)    $120\,\mathrm{N}$    and    $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (h)  $170\,\mathrm{N}$    and    $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    .  

a   severe   plastic   deformation   (SPD),   resulting   in   a   ﬂatten   sur- face   without   surface   crack   ( Fig.   4 (c)),   while   the   oxygen   con- tent   was    $10.78\%$  .   At    $200\,\mathrm{N}.$    the   surface   material   was   plastic- ﬂowed   more   apparently   along   the   sliding   direction,   producing an   evident   extruded   edge   ( Fig.   4 (d)).   Meanwhile   the   oxygen content   reached    $14.29\%$  ,   indicating   a   heavily   oxidzed   surface. In   addition,   the   oxidzed   surface   material   cracked   and   broke off   from   edge   due   to   its   fragile   nature   under   such   a   high applied   load.   SPD   and   spalling   of   oxide   layer   were   the   pre- dominant   wear   mechanisms   in   the   second   stage.   In   the   case of   sliding   wear   at    $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    as   the   load   was   increased   from   20 to  $60\,\mathrm{N}$    in   the   ﬁrst   stage   of   wear   rate-load   curve,   worn   surface was   apparently   ﬂattened,   and   the   amount   of   cracks   relating with   delamination   wear   signiﬁcantly   decreased   ( Fig.   4 (e)   and (f)).   Meanwhile,   oxygen   content   still   maintained   a   medium-to- high   level   of    $7.25\%{-}16.54\%$  − Therefore, delamination, mild plastic   deformation   and   surface   oxidation   were   the   dominated wear   mechanisms   in   the   ﬁrst   stage.   When   wear   entered   into the   second   stage,   at    $120\,\mathrm{N}$    for   instance,   the   worn   surface   was severely   deformed   along   the   sliding   direction,   which   resulted in   an   extruded   edge,   but   no   cracks   were   produced   on   the   sur- face   ( Fig.   4 (g)).   The   oxygen   content   reduced   to   only    $3.3\%$  .   At high   load   of    $170\,\mathrm{N}$    the   surface   material   suffered   from   melt- ing   since   there   were   signs   of   melt   waves   and   a   sleek   edge ( Fig.   4 (h)),   while   the   oxygen   content   was    $6.0\%$  .   Therefore, SPD   and   surface   melting   were   the   main   wear   mechanisms   in the   second   stage.   SEM   observation   results   prove   that   the   wear mechanism   transition   from   the   ﬁrst   stage   to   the   second   stage actually   corresponds   to   M-S   wear   transition.  

The   reasons   for   lower   wear   rate   at    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    than   at    $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  within    $\mathrm{20–120\,N}$    and   plateau   occurrence   within    $\ensuremath{120–160\,\mathrm{N}}$  could   be   qualitatively   explained   by   the   change   of   surface composition.   It   is   found   from   elemental   mappings   that   the surfaces   were   oxidized   much   heavier   at    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    than   at    $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  within    ${20}–{40}\,\mathrm{N}$    Therefore,   under   loads   of   20   and    $40\,\mathrm{N}$    a heavily   oxidized   layer   might   be   responsible   for   a   lower   wear rate   occurring   at    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    since   oxide   layer   is   usually   harder than  $\mathbf{Mg}$    matrix   [23] .   However,   when   the   load   was  $60\,\mathrm{N}.$    oxy- gen   content   reached   as   high   as    $14.97\%$    at    $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    much   higher than    $7.46\%$    at    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  C,   suggesting   that   surface   oxidation   was not   the   only   reason   for   lower   wear   rate   at  $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    It   notes   that the   contents   of    $\mathrm{Y}$    and    $Z\mathrm{n}$    elements   are    $6.32\%$    and    $2.29\%$    at  $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    higher   than    $5.59\%$    and  $2.02\%$    at  $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}.$    A   comparison was   made   between   elemental   mappings   of   worn   surfaces   at 50   and    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    under  $60\,\mathrm{N}$    as   illustrated   in   Fig.   5 .   The   ﬁne   Y- rich   and   Zn-rich   particles   were   found   on   the   worn   surface   at  $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    These   particles   are   possibly    $\mathrm{Mg_{12}Z n Y}$    phase   without being   worn   off   the   surface   due   to   fair   deformation   ability   of  $\mathrm{Mg_{12}Z n Y}$    phase,   and   their   existence   can   strengthen   the   sur- face   material   or   oxide   layer   through   ﬁber   reinforcement   effect [7] .   Such   a   reinforcement   effect   was   also   found   in   maintaining a   wear   rate   plateau   within    $\ensuremath{120–160\,\mathrm{N}}$    at    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  C,   for   example, the   contents   of    $\mathrm{Y}$    and  $Z\mathrm{n}$    elements   were    $6.29\%$    and  $2.20\%$    at  $140\,\mathrm{N}.$    while   the   oxygen   content   was   only    $7.84\%$  .  

A   wear   rate   map   and   a   wear   mechanism   transition map   were   plotted   on   load-temperature   coordinate   system   for  $\mathrm{Mg97Zn1Y}2$    alloy.   Fig.   6 (a)   is   the   wear   rate   map   that   lists the   wear   rate   data   at   various   loads   and   temperatures.   The data   were   expressed   in    $\mathrm{m}^{3}\mathrm{m}^{-1}\times10^{-12}$  × .   At   M-S   wear   transi- tion   loads,   the   wear   rate   generally   decreased   with   temperature along   the   solid   line  $\mathbf{A}\mathbf{A}^{\prime}$  ,   decreasing   from    $45.3\times10^{-12}\,\mathrm{m}^{3}\mathrm{m}^{-1}$  × at  $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  to  $32.0\times10^{-12}\;\mathrm{m}^{3}\mathrm{m}^{-1}$    at  $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  It is also found that  

  
Fig.   5.   SEM   images   and   EDS   mappings   of   worn   surfaces   at    $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    and  $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    under    $60\ \mathrm{N}$  :   SEM   images   at  $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (a)   and    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (b),    $\mathrm{Mg}$    at    $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  (c)   and    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (d),   O   at    $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (e)   and    $100~^{\circ}\mathbf{C}$    (f),   Y   at    $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (g)   and    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  (h),    $Z\mathrm{n}$    at    $50\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (i)   and    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    (j).  

the   difference   between   the   wear   rates   at   M-S   wear   transition loads and those just above line  $\mathbf{A}\mathbf{A}^{\prime}$    appears to be increasingly                   small   with   temperature   increasing.   However,   the   surface   dam- age   extent   is   much   larger   than   what   is   reﬂected   from   wear rate.   Fig.   6 (b)   is   the   wear   mechanism   transition   map.   It   con- sists   of   two   wear   regimes   i.e.   mild   and   severe   wear   regimes. These   two   regimes   are   separated   from   each   other   by   line   AA   ′ . Bellow line  $\mathbf{A}\mathbf{A}^{\prime}$    is the mild wear regime. This regime is also                     thought   as   a   safe   area   for   wear   parts   made   of   the   studied material working steadily. The boundary line  $\mathbf{A}\mathbf{A}^{\prime}$    was drawn  

  
Fig.   6.   Wear   rate   map   (a)   and   wear   mechanism   transition   map   (b),   A- Abrasion;   O –Oxidative   wear;   D -Delamination;   S.O-Surface   oxidation;   M.P.D- Mild   plastic   deformation;   S.P.D-Severe   plastic   deformation;   S.O.L-Spall   of oxide   layer;   Ad-Adhesion;   S.M-Surface   melting.  

based   on   several   attentive   issues   including   the   turning   point   in wear   rate   curve   and   beginning   of   SPD   mechanism.   The   mild wear   regime   includes   three   sub-regimes,   which   are   separated each other by dashed lines  $\mathbf{C}\mathbf{C}^{\prime}$    and  $\mathbf{D}\mathbf{D}^{\prime\prime}$  . Each sub-regime                 represents   two   or   three   wear   mechanisms   such   as   abrasion, oxidative   wear,   dalamination,   surface   oxidation   and   mild   plas- tic deformation. The boundary lines  $\mathbf{C}\mathbf{C}^{\prime}$    and  $\mathrm{DD^{\prime}}$    were mainly           conﬁrmed   by   disappearance   of   grooves   (abrasion)   and   appear- ance   of   irregular   scars   and/or   surface   cracks   (delamination), and   occurrence   of   rather   ﬂatten   surface   with   few   cracks   but almost   no   scars   (delamination + mild   deformation).   The   se- vere   wear   regime   also   includes   three   sub-regimes,   which   are separated each other by dashed lines  $\mathbf{B}\mathbf{B}^{\prime}$    and  $\mathrm{DD^{\prime}}$  . The sur-                   face   melting   sub-regime   is   delimited   by   the   dashed   line    $\mathbf{C}\mathbf{C}^{\prime}$  , which   was   conﬁrmed   by   observations   of   surface   melting   ev- idence   such   as   melt   waves   on   surface,   multilayered   structure or   sleek   edge   by   SEM,   and   low   coefﬁcient   of   friction   due to   the   melt-induced   lubricating   effect.   The   boundary   line   DD   ′ was   conﬁrmed   by   absence   of   spalling   of   oxide   layer   and   EDS detection   of   a   rather   low   content   of   oxygen   element   (less   than  $3.4\%)$    on   severely   deformed   surface   with   extruded   edge   (SPD mechanism).  

# 3.3.   Microstructures   evolution   in   subsurfaces  

SEM   observation   results   revealed   an   important   wear   mech- anism   transition   occurring   on   the   worn   surfaces   during   M-S wear   transition   process.   It   was   that   once   SPD   mechanism   of surface   material   controlled   the   wear   process,   there   was   no formation   of   surface   cracks   even   when   subjected   to   very   high applied   loads.   Owing   to   their   inherent   nature   of   hexagonal close-packed   structure,   Mg   alloys   typically   have   a   moderate ductility,   and   that   is   why   surface   cracks   are   often   found   in delamination   mechanism.   However,   when   severe   wear   com- mences,   the   surface   material   demonstrates   an   incredibly   high ductility.   Therefore,   it   is   reasonable   to   postulate   that   a   cer- tain   type   of   microstructure   transformation   occurs   and   hence changes   the   mechanical   properties   of   surface   material,   espe- cially   improves   the   ductility.   In   order   to   testify   this   deduction, the   microstructure   and   hardness   in   subsurfaces   in   mild   and severe   wear   regimes   were   analyzed.  

In   the   case   of   sliding   wear   at    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    the   worn   samples   that were   subjected   to   loads   of   40,   80,   140   and    $160\,\mathrm{N}$    in   mild   wear and  $230\,\mathrm{N}$    in   severe   wear   were   chosen   for   observation   of   mi- crostructures   evolution   in   the   subsurfaces,   as   shown   in   Fig.   7 . At    $40\,\mathrm{N}$    the   material   in   subsurface   suffered   from   plastic   de- formation,   consequently   leading   to   formation   of   a   deformation zone   beneath   the   surface   ( Fig.   7 (a)).   The   deformation   zone reached   a   depth   of   about    $85\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    In   addition,   it   was   found   that part   of   worn   surface   was   covered   by   mechanically   mixed   layer (MML).   At    $80\,\mathrm{N}$    the   deformation   zone   extended   to   a   depth   of about    $110\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    It   was   observed   that   MML   almost   covered   the whole   worn   surface   from   the   high   magniﬁcation   photograph ( Fig.   7 (b)),   and   the  $\alpha$  -Mg   dendrites   together   with   LOSP   struc- ture   phase   were   elongated   towards   the   sliding   direction   be- neath   MML.   It   is   known   that   the   LOSP   structure   phase   has   a certain   extent   of   deformability   through   slip   and   kinking   band mechanisms   [8] .   At   higher   loads   of   140   and    $160\,\mathrm{N}.$    deforma- tion   zones   were   further   extended   to   larger   depth   of   about   177 and    $195\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    respectively,   and   the   material   presented   a   number of   ﬂow   lines   towards   the   sliding   direction   in   the   top   part   of the   deformation   zone   ( Fig.   7 (c)).   When   subjected   to    $200\,\mathrm{N}$    in severe   wear,   a   friction-affected   zone   (FAZ)   of   a   thickness   of about    $244\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    was   produced   beneath   the   surface   ( Fig.   7 (d)). As   seen   from   the   magniﬁcation   microstructure   ( Fig.   7 (e)),   a different   sub-zone   was   produced   within   the   depth   range   of  $0–48\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    where   most   of   the   plastically   deformed   dendrites changed   and   transformed   into   newly   formed   ﬁne   microstruc- ture.   The   grains   were   so   ﬁne   that   they   could   not   be   rec- ognized   well   under   the   resolution-limited   microscope.   This sub-zone   could   be   composed   of   DRX   microstructure   since large   plastic   deformation   and   frictional   heating   could   promote DRX   transformation   near   the   surface.   There   was   a   deformed  

  
J.   An,   Y.X.   Tian   and   C.Q.   Feng   Journal   of   Magnesium   and   Alloys   xxx   (xxxx)   xxx  

microstructure   sub-zone   beneath   DRX   sub-zone,   where   the ﬂow   lines   and   deformation   twins   could   be   observed.   At  $230\,\mathrm{N}$    in   surface   melting   mechanism,   FAZ   further   increased to   a   depth   of   about    $274\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    and   it   consisted   of   four   differ- ent   microstructure   sub-zones.   They   were   solidiﬁcation,   DRX, deformation  $+\mathrm{DRX}$  +   and   deformation   sub-zones,   respectively. The   thickness   values   of   these   sub-zones   were   about   20,   39, 117   and    $74\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    respectively.   The   details   of   microstructure in   the   solidiﬁcation,   DRX   and   deformation + DRX   mixed   mi- crostructure   sub-zones   are   shown   in   the   magniﬁcation   mi- crophotograph   ( Fig.   7 (f)).   The   features   in   the   solidiﬁcation sub-zone   were   that   LOSP   structure   phase   transformed   from original   strips   to   a   large   amount   of   ﬁne   particles   embedded in   the  $\scriptstyle{\alpha-\mathbf{M}\mathbf{g}}$    phase,   these   particles   presented   smooth   edge   and they   were   arranged   in   necklace   along   sliding   direction.   The change   of   LOSP   structure   phase   indicates   that   the   material   is partly   molten   during   wear   testing.   Large   stripes   of    $\mathrm{Mg12ZnY}$  present   the   sign   of   erosion   by   melt,   while   those   thin  $\mathrm{Mg_{12}Z n Y}$  phase   strips   in   the   eutectics    $(\mathbf{M}\mathbf{g}_{12}\mathbf{Z}\mathbf{n}\mathbf{Y}$    phase +  $+\alpha$  -Mg   phase)  

locally   melt,   and   are   broken   into   ﬁne   particles   in   the   ﬂow- ing   deformation.   A   quite   amount   of   ﬁne   grains   in   micrometer scale   can   be   roughly   recognized   in   DRX   sub-zone.   The   mi- crostructure   in   deformation + DRX   mixed   microstructure   sub- zone   essentially   maintains   the   deformed   morphology   and   only a   little   amount   of   DRX   grains   can   be   recognized   in   the    $\scriptstyle{\alpha-\mathbf{M}\mathbf{g}}$  dendrites.  

In   the   case   of   sliding   wear   at    $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}.$    in   mild   wear,   at  $40\,\mathrm{N}$    for   example,   FAZ   reached   a   depth   of   about    $102\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$  ( Fig.   8 (a)).   The   material   adjacent   to   the   surface   suffered   from a   large   plastic   deformation,   resulting   in   ﬂow   lines   extending towards   the   surface   in   an   angle   of   about    $20^{\circ}$   ( Fig.   8 (b)).   At 60   N,   FAZ   was   deepened   to   about    $180\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    ( Fig.   8 (c)),   and the   material   near   the   surface   was   subjected   to   much   more intensiﬁed   plastic   deformation   ( Fig.   8 (d)).   However,   at    $120\,\mathrm{N}$  in   severe   wear,   FAZ   extended   to   a   depth   of   about    $242\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$  ( Fig.   8 (e)).   The   most   part   of   FAZ   was   essentially   composed of   DRX   microstructure,   but   the   DRX   grain   size   was   found to   vary   with   location.   Fine-grain   DRX   sub-zone   was   located  

  
Fig.   8.   Microstructures   in   the   subsurfaces   of   pins   worn   at  $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    and   different   loads:   (a)   and   (b)   40 N,   (c)   and   (d)   60 N,   (e)   and   (f)   120 N.  

within   the   depth   range   of    $0–42\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    where   SPD   brought   about ﬂow   lines   along   the   sliding   direction.   Coarse-grain   DRX   sub- zone   was   formed   within   the   depth   range   of    $42{-}186\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    where DRX   grains   in   micrometer   scale   could   be   clearly   recognized ( Fig.   8 (f)).  

It   is   well   known   that   the   requirements   for   DRX   microstruc- ture   transformation   are   a   large   enough   plastic   deformation   and a   high   enough   temperature.   The   friction-induced   plastic   de- formation   in   subsurface   can   be   described   by   an   approach   of equivalent   plastic   strain   27 , [28] .   The   equivalent   strain   can   be expressed   by   Eq.   (1) .  

$$
\varepsilon(z)=\frac{\sqrt{3}}{3}\tan(\theta(z))
$$  

where    $\varepsilon$   is   equivalent   strain,    $z$    is   depth,    $\theta$   is   the   shear   angle of   ﬂow   line   at   depth    $z.$  .   The   subsurface   plastic   deformation strains   of   two   samples   worn   at   100   and    $200\,^{\circ}\mathbf{C}$    in   mild   wear regime   are   illustrated   in   Fig.   9 .   The   equivalent   plastic   strain is   rather   high   near   the   surface,   and   then   reduces   with   depth.  

  
Fig.   9.   Subsurface   equivalent   plastic   strain   vs.   depth   from   surface.  

  
J.   An,   Y.X.   Tian   and   C.Q.   Feng   Journal   of   Magnesium   and   Alloys   xxx   (xxxx)   xxx  

The   equivalent   plastic   strain   can   maintain   above   1.0   within a   certain   depth   range,   for   example,    $0{-}130\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    at    $140\,\mathrm{N}$    and  $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    and  $0{-}60\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    at    $60\,\mathrm{N}$    and    $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    Apparently,   such   a big   plastic   deformation   strain   satisﬁes   the   requirement   of   plas- tic   deformation   for   DRX   transformation.   In   addition,   when   the applied   load   surpasses   a   critical   value,   the   surface   tempera- ture   can   reach   the   critical   temperature   for   DRX   transformation with   the   help   of   friction   and   furnace   heating.   Therefore,   DRX microstructures   were   observed   in   subsurfaces   of   pins   worn   in severe   wear   regime.  

# 3.4.   Hardness   change   in   subsurfaces  

The   microhardness   change   that   was   accompanied   by   the microstructure   evolution   in   the   subsurfaces   was   also   mea- sured,   as   shown   in   Fig.   10 .   Under   the   condition   of   test   tem- perature  $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    the   hardness-depth   curves   at   various   loads   of 40,   80,   140   and    $160\,\mathrm{N}$    in   mild   wear   are   shown   in   Fig.   10 (a). At   each   load,   the   hardness   decreased   monotonously   with   in- creasing   depth   until   the   hardness   of   about    $77\ \mathrm{HV}.$    This   hard- ness   represents   the   unaffected   substrate.   In   the   depth   ranges:  

$0{-}90\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    at    $40\,\mathrm{N}$     $0{-}120\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    at    $80\,\mathrm{N}$     $0{-}180\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    at    $140\,\mathrm{N}$    and  $0{-}200\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    at    $160\,\mathrm{N}.$    the   hardness   is   found   to   be   higher   than that   of   the   substrate.   These   depth   ranges   are   essentially   equal to   those   for   plastic   deformation   zones   observed   in   Fig.   7 . Apparently,   it   is   the   strain-hardening   effect   in   theses   depth ranges   that   gives   rise   to   a   higher   hardness,   and   the   hardness enhancement   is   increasingly   signiﬁcant   with   increasing   load, indicating   strain-hardening   effect   is   intensiﬁed   with   load   ris- ing.   The   hardness-depth   curves   at   200   and    $230\,\mathrm{N}$    in   severe wear   are   shown   in   Fig.   10 (b).   For   the   purpose   of   comparison, the   hardness   variation   at    $160\,\mathrm{N}$    is   also   included   in   Fig.   10 (b). At   200   N,   the   variation   of   hardness   with   depth   consisted   of two   stages.   The   ﬁrst   stage   was   from   0   to    $60\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    where   hard- ness   decreased   to   a   relatively   low   value   of    $80\ \mathrm{HV}.$    The   sec- ond   stage   began   from   60   to    $260\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    where   the   hardness   rose again   at   depth   of    $60{-}110\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    and   ﬁnally   went   down   until the   substrate   hardness.   In   the   ﬁrst   stage,   the   hardness   was much   lower   than   it   was   at    $160\,\mathrm{N}.$    suggesting   that   a   signif- icant   softening   effect   occurred.   In   addition,   the   depth   range for   the   ﬁrst   stage   is   essentially   equal   to   the   depth   range   for DRX   sub-zone.   These   phenomena   prove   that   the   softening effect   is   mainly   caused   by   DRX   microstructure   transforma- tion.   The   hardness   rising   and   subsequent   decreasing   at   the second   stage   apparently   indicates   that   strain   hardening   gradu- ally   overwhelms   the   softening   within   the   depth   range   of    $^{60-}$   $110\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    and   then   it   totally   governs   the   hardness   variation within   the   depth   range   of    $110{-}260\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    However,   at    $230\,\mathrm{N}.$  the   variation   of   hardness   with   depth   could   be   divided   into four   stages.   The   ﬁrst   stage   was   from   0   to    $20\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    (forming a   platform),   the   second   stage   range   was   from   20   to    $60\,\upmu\mathrm{m}

$  (showing   a   low   valley),   the   third   stage   was   from   60   to   180

 (presenting   a   plateau),   the   fourth   stage   began   from   180   to  $290\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    (exhibiting   a   decreasing   slope).   It   was   also   found that   in   the   ﬁrst   stage   the   hardness   was   almost   equal   to   the hardness   of   the   substrate,   but   in   the   second   and   third   stages the   hardness   was   lower   than   the   hardness   of   the   substrate,   es- pecially   much   lower   in   the   second   stage.   In   the   fourth   stage, the   hardness   gradually   decreased   to   the   substrate   hardness. Referred   to   the   microstructure   features   in   the   subsurface   as shown   in   Fig.   7 (f),   it   is   prostituted   that   the   solidiﬁed   mi- crostructure   transformation   brings   about   a   hardness   platform comparable   to   the   substrate   hardness   in   the   ﬁrst   stage,   an   al- most   complete   DRX   microstructure   transformation   results   in the   lowest   hardness   valley   in   the   second   stage,   the   mixed   mi- crostructure   of   the   deformed   and   partly   DRXed   grains   causes a   hardness   plateau   in   the   third   stage,   and   plastic   deforma- tion   produces   a   decreasing   hardness   slope   in   the   fourth   stage. Under   the   condition   of   test   temperature    $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}.$    the   varia- tions   of   hardness   with   depth   at   different   loads   of   40,   60   and  $120\,\mathrm{N}$    were   also   measured.   At   applied   loads   of   40   and    $60\,\mathrm{N}$  in   mild   wear,   these   two   hardness   curves   presented   the   typical strain-hardening   effect   in   their   respective   FAZs   ( Fig.   10 (c)). However,   at    $120\,\mathrm{N}$    in   severe   wear,   at   depth   of    $_{0-220\,\upmu\mathrm{m}}$    the hardness   was   even   lower   than   it   was   at    $60\,\mathrm{N}$    ( Fig.   10 (d)), suggesting   that   softening   effect   controls   the   hardness   varia- tion.   The   depth   range   of   softening   could   be   divided   into   two subranges.   The   ﬁrst   one   was   from   0   to  $40\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    and   the   second one   began   from   40   to    $220\,\upmu\mathrm{m}$    It   was   found   that   the   hard- ness   was   much   higher   in   the   ﬁrst   one   than   in   the   second   one. This   phenomenon   in   fact   veriﬁes   the   results   of   microstructure observation   of   Fig.   8 (f).   The   high   hardness   in   the   ﬁrst   sub- range   is   due   to   formation   of   ﬁne   DRX   grains   induced   by   high plastic   strain,   while   low   hardness   in   the   second   subrange   is attributed   to   the   coarse   DRX   grains   induced   by   low   plastic strain.   The   difference   in   DRX   grain   size   between   the   ﬁrst   and second   subranges   apparently   agrees   with   DRX   theory,   i.e.   the larger   the   plastic   deformation,   the   ﬁner   the   DRX   grains   grow. At   depth   of   220–250,   the   hardness   decreased   to   the   substrate hardness,   indicating   that   plastic   deformation   sub-zone   takes account   only   a   small   part   of   FAZ.  

The   above   experimental   results   shows   that   strain   hardening dominates   the   mechanical   properties   of   material   in   subsurface in   mild   wear,   while   DRX   softening   takes   over   in   severe   wear. The   microstructure   transformation   in   subsurfaces   before   and after   M-S   wear   transition   was   schematically   shown   in   Fig.   11 . According   to   Archard’s   wear   law   [29] ,   wear   resistance   relies on   the   hardness   of   metallic   materials,   and   increasing   hardness favors   improving   resistance   to   wear.   Therefore,   in   mild   wear,  

  
Fig.   11.   Schematic   diagram   showing   the   microstructure   change:   (a)   before M-S   wear   transition,   (b)   after   M-S   wear   transition.  

increasing   load   deepens   the   plastic   deformation   zone,   and   in- tensiﬁes   the   strain   hardening   of   surface   material   ( Fig.   11 (a)). Consequently,   the   gradual   increasing   of   wear   rate   with   load in   mild   wear   regime   is   ascribed   to   strain   hardening   effect. However,   a   combination   of   the   frictional   and   environmental heating   promotes   the   DRX   microstructure   transformation   in subsurface   in   severe   wear   regime   ( Fig.   11 (b)),   which   conse- quently   results   in   DRX   softening.   DRX   softening   brings   about a   rapid   rising   of   wear   rate.   That   is,   DRX   softening   activates the   M-S   wear   transition   at   elevated   temperatures.   Therefore, it   is   reasonable   to   deduce   that   the   elevated-temperature   M-S wear   transition   should   still   obey   the   contact   surface   DRX   tem- perature   criterion   proposed   by   Liang   et   al.   [12] .   The   criterion tells   that   M-S   wear   transition   starts   when   surface   tempera- ture   rises   up   to   the   critical   DRX   temperature   of   material,   i.e.  $T_{S}{\geq}T_{D R X}$  ≥ .  

# 3.5.   M-S   wear   transition   loads  

M-S   wear   transition   load   is   plotted   against   test   temper- ature   in   Fig.   12 .   Obviously,   the   transition   load    $F_{T}$  exhibits   an   approximately   linear   relation   with   test   temperature    $T.$  .   The transition   load-temperature   curve   is   thus   linearly   ﬁtted.   The ﬁtted   line   can   also   be   written   as   Eq.   (2)   using   the   line   slope,  $k{=}{-}0.7842$  and   the    $T\cdot$  - axis   intercept,    $T_{\mathrm{C}}{=}302.91\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  

$$
F_{T}=-k(T_{c}-T)
$$  

  
Fig.   12.   M-S   wear   transition   loads   at   different   test   temperatures.  

In   accordance   with   SDT   criterion   for   M-S   wear   transition, i.e.   Eq.   (3) ,   Liang   et   al.   [12]   proposed   a   formula   for   evaluating transition   load,   as   expressed   by   Eq.   (4) .  

$$
T_{s}\geq T_{D R X}
$$  

$$
F_{T}=\frac{(T_{D R X}-T)}{K_{D R X}\mu\nu}
$$  

where    $T s$    is   the   contact   surface   temperature,    $T_{D R X}$  the   criti-   cal   temperature   for   DRX   transformation   of   surface   material at   sliding   speed    $\nu,~T$    the   test   environmental   temperature,    $\upmu$  the   coefﬁcient   of   friction.    $K_{D R X}$  in   Eq.   (4)   is   a   constant   that   depends   on   wear   apparatus   and   physical   properties   of   pin   and disc,   and   it   is   expressed   by   Eq.   (5) .  

$$
K_{D R X}=\frac{\alpha l_{b}}{A_{n}K_{m p}}
$$  

where  $A_{n}$  is   the   nominal   contact   area,  $K_{m p}$  and    $l_{b}$  are   the   ther-       mal   conductivity   mean   diffusion   distance   of   pin   respectively,  $\alpha$   is   the   fraction   of   heat   conducted   into   pin.  

In   the   present   study,   it   was   found   that    $\upmu$   varied   a   little at   each   transition   load   within   test   temperature   range   of    $20\mathrm{-}$   $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}.$    i.e.   it   ranged   from   0.30   to   0.32.   On   the   other   hand, temperature   has   a   little   inﬂuence   on    $K_{m p}$  of    $\mathrm{Mg97Zn1Y}2$    al-   loy,   as   temperature   increased   from   50   to    $200\,^{\circ}\mathbf{C}$   $K_{m p}$  increases   a little, from 57 to  $64\mathrm{{W}m^{-1}K^{-1}}$    [30] . Other parameters ,  $l_{b}$                   $\alpha$    and    $A_{n}$  are   also   almost   constant   under   critical   conditions   of   M-S   wear   transition.   Therefore,   if   the   criterion   of   M-S   wear transition   and   the   formula   for   evaluating   transition   load   is applicable   to   elevated-temperature   severe   wear   transition,   and  $K_{D R X}$  is   still   considered   as   a   constant,  $F_{T}$  should   present   a   lin-     ear   relation   with    $T_{\cdot}$  .   The   critical   surface   temperature    $T_{D R X}$  is   reported   to   be    $311.6\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    for   M-S   wear   transition   at   the   sliding speed   of  $0.5\,\mathrm{m}/\mathrm{s}$    [17] .  $K_{D R X}$  is   therefore   calculated   to   be   8.816   using   the   sliding   data   at    $100\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$  C:    $F_{T}$   $160\,\mathrm{N}$   $\nu~0.5\,\mathrm{m/s}$     $\upmu\mathrm{~}0.30$  ,    $T_{D R X}\ 311.6\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}.$    The   transition   loads   at   other   test   temperatures are   estimated   using   Eq.   (4) .   The   calculated   transition   loads are   also   included   in   Fig.   12 .   The   calculated   transition   loads have   a   good   consistence   with   those   measured   ones.   The   error ranges   from    $0.2\%$    to    $1.83\%$    within   the   temperature   range   of

  ${20}{-150}\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}.$  .   The   big   deviation   occurred   at    $200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}.$    4.4   N,   about

  $5.5\%$    of   the   measured   transition   load.   Moreover,   if   the   M-S wear   transition   follows   the   SDT   criterion,   the    $T_{C}$  in   Eq.   (2)   ac-   tually   corresponds   to    $T_{D R X}$  in   Eq.   (4) ,   and    $-k$    corresponds   to    $K_{D R X}\upmu\upnu$  .   The   calculated    $T_{D R X}$  by   DRX   theory   is    $311.6\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$     $K_{D R X}\upmu\upnu$    is   0.7561,   while   the   linearly   ﬁtted    $T_{C}$  is    $302.9\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}.$     $\cdot k$    is   0.7842.   The   difference   between   the   two   groups   of   data   is small.   Therefore,   under   given   elevated   temperature   wear   con- ditions,   M-S   wear   transition   of    $\mathrm{Mg97Zn1Y}2$    alloy   still   obeys the   SDT   criterion.  

# 4.   Conclusions  

1.   At   test   temperatures   of    ${20}{-}200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}.$  ,   wear   rates   increased with   increasing   load.   Each   wear   rate   vs.   load   curve   exhib- ited   two   different   developing   stages   that   corresponded   to mild   wear   and   severe   wear   respectively.  

 2.   Wear   mechanisms   operating   in   mild   wear   and   severe   wear were   indicated   in   the   wear   mechanism   transition   map.  

 3.   After   M-S   wear   transition,   the   primary   changes   of   mi- crostructure   and   mechanical   property   in   subsurfaces   were DRX   microstructure   transformation   and   the   resulting   soft- ening.   DRX   softening   in   subsurface   is   the   major   cause   of M-S   wear   transition.  

 4.   M-S   wear   transition   load   decreased   linearly   with   tempera- ture   rising.  

 5.   M-S   wear   transition   at   temperatures   of    ${20}{-}200\,^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$    obeys the   SDT   criterion.  

# Acknowledgements  

The   authors   would   like   to   thank   the   support   from   National Natural   Science   Foundation   of   China   (Grant   No. 51775226 ).  

# References  

[1]   W.   Gong     K.   Aizawa     S.   Harjo     R.   Zheng     T.   Kawasaki     J.   Abe     T.   Kamiyama     N.   Tsuji     Int.   J.   Plast.   111   (2018)   288–306    

 [2]   H.   Liu     J.   Jia     X.   Yang     J.   Yang     D.   Song     J.   Jiang     A.   Ma     J.   Alloys   Compd.   704   (2017)   509–511    

 [3]   J.   Kim     S.   Sandlobes     D.   Raabe     Acta   Mater.   82   (2015)   414–423    

 [4]   J.   Kim     W.   Ko     S.   Sandlobes     M.   Heidelmann     B.   Grabowski     D.   Raabe     Acta   Mater.   112   (2016)   171–183    

 [5]   K.   Hagihara     T.   Okamuto     M.   Yamasaki     Y.   Kawamura     T.   Nakano     Scri.   Mater.   117   (2016)   32–36    

 [6]   Y.   Kawamura     K.   Hayashi     A.   Inoue     T.   Masumoto     Mater.   Trans.   42   (2001)   1172–1176    

 [7]   K.   Hagihara     A.   Kinoshita     Y.   Fukusumi     M.   Yamasaki     Y.   Kawamura     Mater.   Sci.   Eng.   A   560   (2013)   71–79    

 [8]   D.   Egusa     M.   Yamasaki     Y.   Kawamura     E.   Abe     Mater.   Trans.   54   (2013)   698–702    

 [9]   K.   Hagihara     A.   Kinoshita     Y.   Fukusumi     M.   Yamasaki     Y.   Kawamura     Mater.   Sci.   Eng.   A   560   (2013)   71–79    

 [10]   J.   An     R.G.   Li     Y.   Lu     C.M.   Chen     Y.   Xu     X.   Chen     L.M.   Wang     Wear   265   (2008)   97–104    

 [11]   H.   Chen     A.T.   Alpas     Wear   246   (2000)   106–116    

 [12] C. Liang  C. Li  X.X. Lv  J. An  Wear 312 (2014) 29–39  

[13]   C.   Taltavull     A.J.Lopez   B.Torres     J.   Rams     Wear   301   (2013)   15–25  

# J.   An,   Y.X.   Tian   and   C.Q.   Feng   Journal   of   Magnesium   and   Alloys   xxx   (xxxx)   xxx  

[14]   C.   Taltavull     P.   Rodrigo     B.   Torres     A.J.   Lopez     J.   Rams     Mater.   Des. 56   (2014)   549–556    

 [15]   S.A.   Selvan     S.   Ramanathan     Mater.   Sci.   Eng.   A   527   (2010)   1815–1820  

 [16]   T.F.   Su     X.   Han     Y.B.   Wang     M.L.   Yin     C.   Liang     J.   An     Tribol.   Trans. 58   (2015)   549–559    

 [17]   J.   An     W.   Sun     X.D.   Niu     Tribol.   .Lett.   65   (2017)   98    

 [18]   J.   An     X.H.   Xuan     J.   Zhao     W.   Sun     C.   Liang     J.   Mater     Eng.   Perf.   26 (2017)   4940–4952    

 [19]   W.   Su     X.H.   Xuan     L.   Li     J.   An,   Mater.   11   (2018)   505    

 [20]   A.   Zafari     H.M.   Ghasemi     R.   Mahmudi     Wear   292-293   (2012)   33–40    

 [21]   A.   Zafari     H.M.   Ghasemi     R.   Mahmudi     Mater.   Des.   54   (2014)   544–552  

 [22]   F.   Labib     H.M.   Ghasmi     R.   Mahmudi     Wear   348-349   (2016)   69–79  

[23]   S.Q.   Wang     Z.R.   Yang     Y.T.   Zhao     M.X.   Wei     Tribol.   Lett.   38   (2010) 39–45    

 [24]   R.V.P.   Kaviti     D.   Jeyasimman     G.   Parande     M.   Gupta     R.   Narayanasamy   J.   Mag.   Alloys   6   (2018)   263–276    

 [25]   N.M.   Chelliah     R.   Kumar     H.   Singh     M.K.   Surappa     J.   Mag.   Alloys   5 (2017)   35–40    

 [26]   A.   Dey     K.M.   Pandey     Int.   J.   Mater.   Res.   109   (2018)   1050–1070    

 [27]   M.A.   Moore     R.M.   Douthwaite     Metall.   Trans.   7   (1976)   1833–1839    

 [28]   B.   Venkataraman     G.   Sundararajan     Acta   Mater.   44   (1996)   461–473    

 [29]   J.F.   Archard     J.   Appl.   Phys.   24   (1953)   981–988    

 [30]   M.   Yamasaki     Y.   Kawamura     Scri.   Mater.   60   (2009)   264–267  