# Steric Bulk at Cycloartenol Synthase Position 481 Influences Cyclization and Deprotonation  

Seiichi P. T. Matsuda,\* Lisa B. Darr, Elizabeth A. Hart, Jennifer B. R. Herrera, Kelly E. McCann, Michelle M. Meyer, Jihai Pang, and Hala G. Schepmann  

Department of Chemistry and Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Rice Uni V ersity, 6100 South Main Street, Houston, Texas 77005  

matsuda@rice.edu  

Received May 4, 2000  

# ABSTRACT  

  

Cycloartenol synthase converts oxidosqualene to the pentacyclic sterol precursor cycloartenol. An  Arabidopsis thaliana  cycloartenol synthase Ile481Val mutant was previously shown to produce lanosterol and parkeol in addition to its native product cycloartenol. Experiments are described here to construct Phe, Leu, Ala, and Gly mutants at position 481 and to determine their cyclization product profiles. The Phe mutant was inactive, and the Leu mutant produced cycloartenol and parkeol. The Ala and Gly mutants formed lanosterol, cycloartenol, parkeol, achilleol A, and camelliol C. Monocycles comprise most of the Gly mutant product, showing that an alternate cyclization route can be made the major pathway by a single nonpolar mutation.  

Terpene synthases catalyze cationic cyclization and rear- rangement reactions that convert acarbocyclic precursors to carbocyclic products. Four enzyme families provide hundreds of terpene hydrocarbon structures: the higher plant TPS enzymes (which form monoterpenes, sesquiterpenes, and diterpenes),   fungal 2   sesquiterpene synthases, bacterial ses- quiterpene synthases,   and a prokaryotic and eukaryotic triterpene synthase family that cyclizes either squalene 4   or oxidosqualene.   How terpene synthases mediate these reac- tions has recently begun to be investigated by mutagenesis. Sesquiterpene synthases 6   and squalene-hopene cyclases 7   have been modified to make new compounds. We describe here  

experiments to determine the role of steric bulk at position 481 of  Arabidopsis thaliana  cycloartenol synthase ( At- CAS1).  

Cycloartenol synthase cyclizes oxidosqualene to the pro- tosteryl cation, which is then rearranged and deprotonated to give cycloartenol (Scheme 1).   Isoleucine 481 ( A. thaliana  

#  

  
Scheme 1. Reaction Catalyzed by Cycloartenol Synthase  

numbering) is strictly conserved in the known cycloartenol synthases.   We recently described an  At CAS1 Ile481Val mutant that converts oxidosqualene to cycloartenol   $(55\%)$  , lanosterol   $(24\%)$  , and parkeol   $(21\%)$  .   To investigate further the importance of sterics at this position, we constructed  $A t C A S1$   mutants bearing phenylalanine, leucine, alanine, or glycine at position 481. The  At CAS1 cDNA was subjected to oligo-directed mutagenesis in vector pRS305GAL.   The mutants were subcloned into the high-copy yeast expression vector pRS426GAL 11   and expressed in the yeast strain LHY2, from which both squalene synthase and lanosterol synthase had been deleted.   Typically, cells from 1-L cultures prepared as described 13   were suspended in   $100\,\mathrm{mM}$  sodium phosphate buffer at  $\mathrm{pH}\ 6.4$   and lysed in a French Press. Racemic oxidosqualene was added to   $1\;\mathrm{mg/mL}$   from a  $20\ \mathrm{mg/mL}$   solution in   $20\%$   Triton X-100. The reaction was quenched after  $24{\mathrm{~h~}}$  , and triterpene alcohol products were isolated as described.  

Reactions were monitored by TLC (silica gel, 1:1 hexane/ ether), and products were acetylated (acetic anhydride/ pyridine) and identified by GC, GC/MS, and    $\mathrm{^{1}H}$  , and/or  $^{13}\mathrm{C}$  NMR.  At CAS1 Ile481Phe was inactive, but the remaining mutants metabolized oxidosqualene. The  At CAS1Ile481Leu products were indistinguishable from cycloartenol by TLC, which cannot resolve most triterpene alcohols because their  $3\beta$  -hydroxy groups are in sterically similar environments. The products were acetylated, and NMR and GC revealed multiple compounds. The    $^{13}\mathrm{C}$   NMR spectrum displayed all 32 cycloartenyl acetate signals,   establishing the major product as cycloartenol. Cycloartenyl acetate signals were also dominant in the  $^1\mathrm{H\;NMR}$   $\delta\,5.22$   (C-11), 0.64 (C-18), and   $0.73\mathrm{\pm}$   (C-30) and    $^{13}\mathrm{C}$   NMR signals at δ  44.27, 46.99, and 148.11 were characteristic of parkeyl acetate.   The  $\mathrm{^{1}H}$   NMR spectrum revealed a trace of lanosterol, with characteristic lanosteryl acetate signals at    $\delta$  0.68 and   $1.00\ \mathrm{ppm}$   corresponding to C18 and C19, respec- tively.   GC/MS analyses confirmed the NMR results; the unknowns had retention times (relative to cholesteryl acetate) and fragmentation patterns identical to those of acetylated cycloartenol, parkeol, and lanosterol standards (Scheme 2).  

  
Scheme 2. Cycloartenol Synthase Ile481 Mutants Convert Oxidosqualene ( 1 ) to a Variety of Polycyclic and Monocyclic Structures Including Cycloartenol ( 2 ), Parkeol ( 3 ), Lanosterol ( 4 ), Achilleol A ( 5 ), and Camelliol C ( 6 )  

GC and GC/MS analyses of the acetylated Ile481Ala and Ile481Gly products also revealed cycloartenol, lanosterol, and parkeol. However, two additional compounds were observed to have the appropriate mass for triterpenyl acetates. These novel compounds were separable (silica gel 2:1 hexane/ether) from a fraction shown by    $\mathrm{^{1}H}$   NMR to be a mixture of lanosterol, cycloartenol, and parkeol. Preparative argentic TLC   $\mathrm{(SiO_{2}/A g N O_{3}}$  , 3 developments in 1:1 methylene chloride/hexane) 17   provided from the Ile481Gly mutant pure samples shown to be achilleol  $\mathrm{A^{18}}$    acetate and camelliol  $C^{19}$  acetate by    $\mathrm{^{1}H}$   NMR analysis (Scheme 2). Similar analyses showed that the Ile481Ala mutant produced the same five compounds.  

<td><table  border="1"><thead><tr><td><b>481 residue</b></td><td><b>side chain</b></td><td><b> cycloartenol (2)</b></td><td><b>parkeol (3) </b></td><td><b>lanosterol (4)</b></td><td><b>achilleol A (5)</b></td><td><b> camelliol C (6)</b></td></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>isoleucine (wild-type)1</td><td> sec-butyl</td><td>99</td><td>1</td><td>0b</td><td>0b</td><td>0b</td></tr><tr><td>leucine</td><td>isobutyl</td><td>83</td><td>16</td><td>1</td><td>0b</td><td>0b</td></tr><tr><td>valinell</td><td>isopropyl</td><td>55</td><td>21</td><td>24 </td><td>0b</td><td>0b</td></tr><tr><td>alanine</td><td>methyl</td><td>12</td><td>15</td><td>54</td><td>13</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>glycine</td><td>hydrogen</td><td>17</td><td>4</td><td>23 </td><td>44</td><td>12 </td></tr></tbody></table></td>  

The products (percent composition determined by GC) of these enzymes are summarized in Table 1. Even minor steric changes at position 481 impair cycloartenol production. Forming the strained cyclopropane ring is apparently readily compromised. Mutating Ile481 to Leu maintains total steric bulk but shifts a methyl group from the  $\beta\cdot$  - to the  $\gamma$  -carbon. This isomeric side chain allows deprotonation from C-11 to yield parkeol, but only minimal deprotonation from C-9 or C-8 to form lanosterol. In contrast, mutating to the methyl side chain (Ile481Ala) generates an enzyme that forms lanosterol as its major product. Furthermore, Ala promotes ring B formation less efficiently than Ile, Leu, or Val. The monocyclic cation can deprotonate to either achilleol A or camelliol C. Ile481Gly forms primarily monocycles, and the ratio of achilleol A to camelliol C formation increases relative to that of the Ile481Ala products.  

S. cere V isiae  lanosterol synthase ( Sc ERG7) mutants were recently described in which   $\mathrm{val}454$   (which corresponds to At CAS1 Leu481) was mutated to Phe, Leu, Ile, Ala, and Gly.   Like  At CAS1,  Sc ERG7 lost activity upon mutating the target residue to Phe. The  Sc ERG7 Val454 Leu and Ile mutants remained accurate lanosterol synthases. The Ala and Gly mutants were lanosterol synthases that also produced achilleol A   $5\%$   and   $12\%$  , respectively). Decreasing steric bulk at  Sc ERG7 position 454 compromised ring B formation, although to a lesser extent than at the analogous  At CAS1 position 481. Moreover,  Sc ERG7Val454 mutants did not form measurable amounts of the alternative deprotonation products cycloartenol, parkeol, and camelliol C   $(\mathopen<\mathclose\bgroup\mathopen<0.5\%)$  . Lanosterol synthase is evidently less sensitive than cy- cloartenol synthase to steric alterations at this position. Perhaps less precise positioning of active site electron density and steric bulk is required to form the energetically favorable tetra substituted olefin than to close the strained cyclopropane ring.  

These experiments establish that cycloartenol synthase can be mutated to make different tetracyclic or monocyclic compounds in high yield. The mutants described herein may mimic naturally occurring enzymes. Achilleol A and camel- liol C have been isolated from plants, but the enzymes that catalyze their formation remain undiscovered. Several organ- isms 20   produce achilleol A without camelliol C, as do the Sc ERG7 Val454 Ala and Gly mutants. Sasanqua oil 21 contains camelliol C and achilleol A, as in the products of At CAS1 Ile481 Ala and Gly mutants. None of these mutants produced camelliol C without achilleol A, and similarly, camelliol C has never been isolated from a natural source unaccompanied by achilleol A. It is tempting to speculate that camelliol C may be produced in nature by a cycloartenol synthase Ile481 Ala or Gly mutant, and achilleol A from a similar mutant of a different oxidosqualene cyclase.  

Acknowledgment.  E.A.H. and J.B.R.H were Robert A. Welch Scholars, and M.M.M was an American Society of Pharmacognosy Undergraduate Fellow. The National Insti- tutes of Health (AI41598) and the Robert A. Welch Founda- tion (C-1323) funded this research. J.B.R.H. was funded by NIH training grant T32 GM08362, and J.P. was supported by NIH grant HL49122.  