# CASE REPORT  

# Effect of rituximab on clinical and laboratory features of anti phospholipid syndrome: a case report and a review of literature  

GL Erre , S Pardini 2 , R Faedda 3   and G Passiu 1 1 Cattedra e Scuola di Specializzazione di Reumatologia;  2 Istituto di Ematologia; and  3 Istituto di Patologia Medica e Metodologia Clinica  Università degli Studi di Sassari, Italy  

Anti phospholipid syndrome (APS) is an autoimmune disorder characterized by a hypercoagulable state related to persistently elevated levels of anti phospholipid antibodies (aPL). Current treatment for APS is only partially effective and new therapies are strongly needed.  

We report on a case of a 50 years old man with APS who suffered from recurrent thromboembolic episodes despite conventional anticoagulant treatment. Eight years after the ﬁrst thrombotic manifestation he was diagnosed with a large B cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Treatment with CHOP (cy clop hos ph amide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone) plus rituximab was started with partial clinical remission of lymphoma and normalization of aPL levels with a three years follow-up period free of thrombotic episodes.  

A review of the literature revealed that only 12 case reports on the use of rituximab in patients with primary, secondary and catastrophic APS have been published. Current knowledge clearly suggests the need for clinical trials to evaluate the effect of rituximab in the treatment of resistant APS. Lupus (2008)  17 , 50–55.  

Key words:  anticardiolipin (antibodies); anti phospholipid antibodies; rituximab; lupus anticoagulant; lymphoma  

# Introduction  

The anti phospholipid syndrome (APS) is an  autoimmune disorder characterized by arterial and venous thrombosis, recurrent fetal loss and persistently positive serum anti phospholipid antibodies (aPL).   A life-threatening form of APS, named catastrophic APS (CAPS) is due to a widespread thrombotic process and may present with multiple organ failure.  

APS may develop independently of any underlying disease (primary APS or PAPS), in association with autoimmune diseases, mainly systemic lupus erythe- matosus (SLE) or malignancies (secondary APS or SAPS).  

Some authors have reported the efﬁcacy of chemotherapy including rituximab, a chimeric mono- clonal antibody directed against CD20 widely used in the treatment of B cell malignancies, on clinical manifestations of APS or on reducing the levels of aPL.   Prompted by this, several authors have also demonstrated the efﬁcacy of rituximab on the treat- ment of several autoimmune conditions, including rheumatoid arthritis, SLE, Sjögren syndrome and vasculitis. To date similar evidences in the treatment of APS are limited and mainly anecdotal.  

# Methods  

Lupus anticoagulant was determined by the Kaolin- clotting time (KCT) and a dilute Russel viper venom time (dRVVT). The anticardiolipin (aCL) IgG and IgM antibodies and the anti-  $\cdot\beta_{2}$  -Glycoprotein I antibodies were determined by solid-phase enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (GA, generic assays GmBH, Germany).  

Each episode of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) was proven with venous compression ultrasonography or angiography. Non compress i bil it y of a previously normalized venous segment and enlargement of thrombus thickness   $(>\,\mathrm{or}=2\,\mathrm{mm})$  ) were considered diagnostic of proximal DVT recurrence. Pulmonary embolisms were conﬁrmed by scintigram/ventilation- perfusion scan and/or thorax CT scan.  

# Case report  

The patient, a 50-year-old man, was previously known with a diagnosis of primary APS. In 1995, he was urgently admitted to our hospital for a left common iliac DVT and acute pulmonary embolism (PE). Anticardiolipin antibodies (aCL) were elevated and lupus anticoagulant (LAC) was demonstrated in the serum of the patient on two different occasions. Thus a diagnosis of PAPS according to the international con- sensus criteria (Sapporo) 3   was made.  

Lifelong anticoagulant therapy with a moderate intensity warfarin (target international normalized ratio (INR) of 2.0–3.0) was started but, despite treat- ment, three further episodes of DVT occurred. In 2002 a new episode of PE supervened and an inferior vena cava ﬁlter was placed.  

In 2003, he was admitted to our institute for fatigue, fever and upper abdominal pain radiating to the inter- scapular region. Physical examination revealed severe splenomegaly and axillary lymph o aden opa thy.  

Laboratory investigations conﬁrmed positivity for aPL (aCL, LAC and anti-  $\upbeta_{2}\mathrm{GPI}$   antibodies) and showed positive antinuclear antibodies (ANA 1:160) and anti-double stranded DNA antibodies.  

An abdominal Doppler ultrasonography revealed a considerable enlargement of the spleen and multiple focal lesions while angiography showed thrombosis of the splenic vein. Working diagnosis included lym- phoma and multiple splenic infarcts. Splenectomy was not performed because the risks for perioperative thromboembolic and hemorrhagic complications were felt to be very high.  

An axillary lymph node excision showed histology consistent with large B cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma while staging bone marrow biopsy was negative. Chest X-ray demonstrated multiple pulmonary nodules prompting an extensive work-up with whole body CT scan and gallium scintigraphy for stadiation of lym- phoma that conﬁrmed pulmonary localization of lym- ph o pro life rat ive disease (stage IV). Because of persistent headaches the patient underwent brain MRI and partial thrombosis of the left transverse cerebral sinus was demonstrated. On the basis of clinical, instrumental and laboratory evidences a diagnosis of  B cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma and primary APS was made in this patient.  

After obtaining informed consent, chemotherapy in- cluding CHOP (cy clop hos ph amide (Cyc), doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone) plus rituximab was started. Rituximab was scheduled at a dose of   $375\,\mathrm{mg}/\mathrm{m}^{2}$    every three weeks for a total of six doses. Rituximab was well tolerated with the exception of a transitory hypotension during the ﬁrst infusion.  

After four infusions the patient developed a com- plete thrombosis of the left femoral vein and a partial thrombosis of the left iliac vein. After the sixth dose of rituximab aPL levels dramatically fell (Figure 1 and Table 1) and no further thromboembolic episodes occurred during follow-up.  

The administration of rituximab allowed achieving a  partial  clinical  remission  of  lymphoma. Unfortunately in 2006 the patient experienced a  recurrence of pulmonary lymphoma detected by  surveillance CT and positron emission tomography (PET). He ﬁnally died from acute respiratory failure due to extensive lymphomatous pulmonary involve- ment. An autopsy was not carried out.  

# Literature review and discussion  

We searched the Medline database (from 1995, year of introduction of rituximab MeSH term, to April 2007) to determine the effect of rituximab on aPL levels, thromboembolic events and thr ombo cyto peni a in patient affected by primary APS, secondary APS and catastrophic APS. We use the following MeSH terms alone or in combination: rituximab, APS, aPL, LAC, anticardiolipin antibody, DVT, pulmonary embolism, stroke and SLE. We further reviewed reference lists. The search was limited to article in English.  

We found 12 case reports published so far (Table 2). No controlled trials have been published, limiting  

  
Figure 1 Trend of aPL after rituximab. Reference values: aCL, anti-  $\cdot{\upbeta}_{2}$   $_2\,\mathrm{GPI}<10\,\mathrm{U/mL}$  ; aPTT 20–32s.  

<td><table  border="1"><thead><tr><td></td><td><b>Ref. value</b></td><td><b>1996</b></td><td><b>2002</b></td><td><b>2003</b></td><td><b>2004 (After RTX)</b></td><td><b>2005</b></td></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>aCL IgG</td><td><10U/mL</td><td>Pos</td><td>Pos</td><td>74.8 U/mL</td><td>5 U/mL</td><td>1.8 U/mL</td></tr><tr><td>Anti-β2 GPI</td><td><10U/mL</td><td>NA</td><td>NA</td><td>86.9 U/mL</td><td>4.5 U/mL</td><td>6 U/mL</td></tr><tr><td>APTT</td><td>28-32"</td><td>182'</td><td>153.8</td><td>203.40</td><td>30.2'</td><td>28.7'</td></tr><tr><td>KCT'</td><td>90-140"</td><td>NA</td><td>NA</td><td>>300'</td><td>120°</td><td>115'</td></tr><tr><td>dRVVT ratio</td><td>0.80-1.20</td><td>NA</td><td>NA</td><td>3.93</td><td>0.95</td><td>1.15</td></tr></tbody></table></td>


NA: not available.  

current evidence to anecdotal cases, an obvious cause of publication bias due to the exclusion of cases in which treatment with rituximab failed to produce clin- ical improvement.  

Thr ombo cyto peni a is a common laboratory mani- festation of APS and in patients affected with SLE is frequently related to the presence of aPL. In patients with severe thr ombo cyto peni a and high risk for bleed- ing, various immuno suppress ive treatments are demonstrated to be effective in improving platelet count. However, a not negligible percentage of patients become resistant to immunosuppression and splenec- tomy cannot be performed because of high risk of bleeding and thrombotic episodes. In these patients, a rational for the use of rituximab can be based on its effect on reducing aPL levels which are in turn  postulated to be responsible for platelet destruction by binding platelet membrane.  

Trappe and co-workers 4   demonstrated a close corre- lation between aCL title reduction and platelets count improvement in a patient with primary APS treated with rituximab for thr ombo cyto peni a refractory to conventional therapies and similar encouraging results were obtained by other authors.  

Ames  et al.   reported only a partial effect of ritux- imab on platelets count consistent with evidence coming from larger trials that demonstrated inefﬁcacy of rituximab in about a half of adult patients with idio- pathic thr ombo cyto peni c purpura (ITP).  

Patients with primary or secondary APS can develop during the course of disease isolated autoim- mune haemolytic anaemia (AHA) or an association of AHA and ITP.  

Haemolysis may be due to a premature erythro- cyte sequestration and destruction by a pathogenic  mechanism similar to that suggested for immune thr ombo cyto peni a.  

Erdozain  et al.   demonstrated resolution of refrac- tory AHA in a patient with primary APS following treatment with standard dose of rituximab and, it is interesting to note the lowering effect of this  drug on the levels of IgM aCL that decreased from   $600~\mathrm{MPL}$   to   $100{\mathrm{~MPL}}$   consistent with data reported  by Tomietto  et al.   in patient with SLE and secondary APS.  

This temporal association is very intriguing in sup- porting a role of antibody reduction on improvement of clinical related manifestations, although the hypoth- esis that the two phenomenons are merely associated cannot be surely refuted.  

On the other hand some authors failed to demon- strate a persistent reduction of   $\mathrm{aPL^{4,5,11}}$    this might be due to the fact that rituximab does not affect long-lived plasma cells 12   acting mainly on B cell leaving lymph node germinal centre.  

Arterial and venous thromboses are the clinical hallmarks of APS and guide therapeutic choice. Gold standard for the treatment of venous thrombosis and stroke is an indeﬁnite anticoagulation 13   but in spite of a seemingly adequate therapy in some patient vessel thrombosis and associated embolism tend to recur. Different immunosuppressant s, plasma exchange or i.v. immunoglobulins have been used as rescue therapy particularly in patients with life-threatening throm- botic events and in the catastrophic APS.  

Prompted by a lack of efﬁcacy with previous stan- dard and conventional treatment several authors observed a dramatic resolution of recurrent and/or severe thrombotic episodes in patients with APS following rituximab introduction. A variable follow-up free of thromboembolic manifestations ranging from 10 to 36 months has been reported.  

This ﬁnding, if validated from large clinical trials, could have favourable implications mainly for the treatment of catastrophic APS as reported by Rubenstein  et al.  

Concomitant immuno suppressors such as cyclo- sporine   $\mathrm{A}^{5}$    or plasmapheresis 11   treatment, might  inﬂuence overall effect of rituximab.  

In this regard our protocol included Cyc, so one could think that effect on aPL and clinical features of APS may partially be attributed to chemotherapy. Previous authors reported inefﬁcacy of conventional CHOP regimen 2   on improvement of APS-related hypercoagulable state, therefore suggesting a promi- nent role of anti-CD20 on the induction of this effect.  

<td><table  border="1"><thead><tr><td><b>N</b></td><td><b>N</b></td><td><b>5</b></td><td></td><td><b>4</b></td><td><b>2</b></td><td><b>4</b></td></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>3</td><td></td><td>3</td><td>M</td><td>4</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>N</td><td> </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1 </td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td> </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td></td><td>营</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>1  1</td><td></td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>1 </td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1 </td><td></td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td></td><td>营</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td> </td><td></td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td> 1</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>N</td><td>M</td><td></td><td>N</td><td></td><td>量</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>真</td><td>1</td><td>N</td><td></td><td>量</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1 </td><td>真</td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td>量</td></tr><tr><td> 1</td><td>真</td><td>N</td><td></td><td>N</td><td></td><td>量</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>真</td><td></td><td>N</td><td>N</td><td>量</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>真</td><td></td><td>N</td><td>N</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td> </td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>N</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>3  </td><td></td><td></td><td>3</td><td></td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>3 d</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1 </td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>自</td><td>M</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>E</td><td></td><td></td><td>O</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>E</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>F</td><td>M</td><td></td><td>M</td><td>M</td><td>F</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>F</td><td>M</td><td></td><td>M</td><td>F</td><td>F</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>4</td><td>8</td><td>F</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>8</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>8</td><td>1</td><td>4</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>8</td><td>3</td><td>1</td><td></td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>4</td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>4</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>4</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td> 1</td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr></tr><tr></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>36</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>营</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>修</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>E</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>O</td></tr><tr><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>F</td><td>F</td><td>F</td><td>F</td></tr><tr><td>5</td></tr></tbody></table></td>  

<td><table  border="1"><thead><tr><td></td><td><b>3</b></td><td></td></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>0</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> </td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>a </td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1 </td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>15</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> </td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>.B</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 星</td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td> </td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>SO</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td> </td><td></td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>8</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>8</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>8</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>8</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>8</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>8</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>8</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></tbody></table></td>


DVT, deep venous thrombosis; PDN, prednisone; AZA, azathioprine; IVIg, intravenous immune globulin; Cyc, cy clop hos ph amide; CsA, cyclosporine A; HCQ, hydroxy chloroquine; Myc, micophenolate; AHA, autoimmune haemolytic anemia; NA, not available; MZL, marginal zone lymphoma; ITP, immune thr ombo cyto peni c purpura; NHL, non-Hodgkin lymphoma.  

On the other hand Leandro  et al.   reported a major clinical improvement in patients affected by rheuma- toid arthritis when Cyc was added to rituximab.  

Most authors used rituximab weekly for four weeks and in some cases a further infusion at three monthly intervals. We administered rituximab at three weekly intervals and for a total of six infusions.  

Interestingly, in this regard, we did not obtain clinical and serological remission (a further episode of DVT occurred and only a partial reduction of aPL titers was obtained) of APS after the ﬁrst four doses possibly due to the fact that we did not reach a complete B cell depletion. Unfortunately this hypothesis cannot be supported by B cell plasmatic levels because of the retrospective nature of this case report.  

Prospective studies are needed to evaluate efﬁcacy and safety of rituximab alone or in combination with other immunosuppressant s and address the issues related to the optimal regimen of persistent B cell depletion achieved by maintenance therapy in these patients.  

# Conclusions  

The case we described and our analysis of the literature are encouraging with regard to the efﬁcacy of rituximab on controlling clinical features of APS and lowering aPL level. Current evidence is only limited to anecdotal cases and randomized controlled trials in patients with APS resistant to the standard therapeutic approach are strongly needed.  

# Acknowledgements  

The authors thank Giovanni Sanna, MD, for helpful discussion and critical review of this manuscript.  

# References  

1 Hughes G. The anti phospholipid syndrome: Ten years on.  Lancet  1993; 342 : 341–344. 2 Veneri D, Ambrosetti A, Franchini M, Mosna F, Poli G, Pizzolo G. Remission of severe anti phospholipid syndrome associated with non- Hodgkin B cell lymphoma after combined treatment with rituximab and chemotherapy.  Haematologica  2005;  90 : 16–17. 3 Wilson WA, Gharavi AE, Koike T  et al.  International consensus state- ment on preliminary classiﬁcation criteria for deﬁnite anti phospholipid syndrome: report of an international workshop.  Arthrits Rheum  1999; 42 : 1309–1311. 4 Trappe R, Loew A, Thuss-Patience P, Dörken B, Riess H. Successful treatment of thr ombo cyto peni a in primary anti phospholipid antibody syndrome with the anti-CD20 antibody rituximab-monitoring of anti phospholipid and anti-GP antibodies: a case report.  Ann Hematol 2006;  85 : 134–135.  

5 Tomietto P, Gremese E, Tolusso B, Venturini P, De Vita S, Ferraccioli G. B cell depletion may lead to normalization of anti- platelet, anti-erythrocyte and anti phospholipid antibodies in systemic lupus erythematosus.  Thromb Haemost  2004;  92 : 1150–1153. 6 Rubenstein E, Arkfeld D, Metyas S, Shinada S, Ehresmann S, Liebman HA. Rituximab treatment for resistant anti phospholipid syndrome.  J Rheumato l 2006;  33 : 355–357. 7 Ames PRJ, Tommasino C, Fossati G, Scenna G, Brancaccio V, Ferrara F. Limited effect of rituximab on thr ombo cyto peni a and anticardiolipin antibodies in a patient with primary anti phospholipid syndrome.  Ann Hematol  2007;  86 : 227–228. 8 Cooper N, Stasi R, Cunningham-Rundles S  et al.  The efﬁcacy and safety of B cell depletion with anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody in adults with chronic immune thr ombo cyto peni c purpura.  Br J Hematol  2004;  125 : 232–239. 9 Braendstrup P, Bjerrum OW, Nielsen OJ  et al.  Rituximab chimeric anti- CD20 monoclonal antibody treatment for adult refractory idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura.  Am J Hematol  2005;  78 : 275–280. 10 Erdozain JG, Ruiz-Irastorza G, Egurbide MV, Aguirre C. Sustained response to rituximab of autoimmune haemolytic anaemia associated with anti phospholipid syndrome.  Haematologica  2004;  89 : ECR34.  

11 Ahn ER, Lander G, Bidot C, Wenche Jy, Ahn YS. Long-term remission from life-threatening hypercoagulable state associated with lupus anti- coagulant (LA) following rituximab therapy.  Am J Hematol  2005;  78 : 127–129. 12 Manz RA, Arce S, Cassese G, Hauser AE, Hiepe F, Radbruch A. Humoral immunity and long-lived plasma cells.  Curr Opinion Immunol 2002;  14 : 517–521. 13 Lim W, Crowther MA, Eikelboom JW. Management of anti phospholipid syndrome.  JAMA  2006;  295 : 1050–1057. 14 Harner KC, Jackson LW, Drabick JJ. Normalization of anticardiolipin antibodies following rituximab therapy for marginal zone lymphoma in a patient with Sjögren’s syndrome.  Rheumatology  2004;  43 : 1309–1310. 15 Weide R, Heymanns J, Pandorf A, Koppler H. Successful long-term treatment of systemic lupus erythematosus with rituximab maintenance therapy.  Lupus  2003;  12 : 779–782. 16 Leandro MJ, Edwards JC, Cambridge G. Clinical outcome in 22 patients with rheumatoid arthritis treated with B lymphocyte depletion.  Ann Rheum Dis  2002;  61 : 863–866. 17 An and a cooma rasa my A, Gibson J, Mc Gill N. “Cure” of life-threatening anti phospholipid syndrome with rituximab.  Intern Med J  2006;  36 : 474–475.  