# FDA proposals to limit the hepatotoxicity of paracetamol (acetaminophen): are they reasonable?  

Garry G. Graham  $\cdot$  Richard O. Day  $\cdot$  Andis Graudins  $\cdot$    Anthoulla Mohamudally  

Received: 3 February 2010 / Accepted: 3 February 2010 / Published online: 7 March 2010  $\copyright$   Springer Basel AG 2010  

Abstract Hepatotoxicity from paracetamol is of great concern because of the considerable number of patients who develop severe toxicity from this drug. A group of senior medical practitioners, academics and scientists were brought together on June 29 and 30, 2009 by the Food and Drug Administration of USA (FDA) with the aim of pro- viding advice on how to limit the number of cases of hepatotoxicity due to paracetamol in USA. The most contentious recommendations were the reduction in the dose of paracetamol to   $650\,\mathrm{\mg}$   and the elimination of prescription combination products of paracetamol and opiates. The ﬁrst recommendation indicates that many members of the committee consider, despite much evi- dence to the contrary, that therapeutic doses of paracetamol (up to  $4{\mathrm{~g~}}$   daily) are associated with a signiﬁcant incidence of hepatotoxicity. The second recommendation, if accepted by FDA, will require major changes in the therapeutic use of paracetamol and opiates. Adoption of these two rec- ommendations may lead to the increased use of NSAIDs with the potential of increasing incidence of NSAIDs- related adverse reactions.  

KeywordsParacetamol $\cdot$   $\cdot$  FDA Alcohol  $\cdot$   Hepatotoxicity  Liver disease  

# Introduction  

A select committee was set up by the FDA to consider and vote on options for reducing paracetamol-induced hepato- toxicity in the USA. The proposed changes to the marketing of paracetamol are very much dependent upon the accuracy of the conclusions regarding the source of paracetamol-induced hepatotoxicity and, in this report, we challenge some of the background supplied to the com- mittee and the conclusions of the committee.  

Several aspects of the meetings are summarised in this report. A background paper containing six options was written by the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research of FDA are available (FDA Background). Several oral pre- sentations were made to the committee. Transcripts of these presentations and discussions at the meeting are also avail- able. (FDA Transcript June 29, FDA Transcript June 30). Reference to and quotations from these documents, as well as literature references, have been made throughout this com- mentary. However, the name, acetaminophen, has been changed to paracetamol in quotations from the FDA documents.  

There was much discussion within the committee and, ﬁnally, 37 members voted on their agreement or objection to the options that were presented to them. They also selected what they considered to be the single most important option to decrease the hepatotoxicity of paracetamol.  

1. Reasons for hepatotoxicity due to paracetamol Seven factors were cited as possible causes of over- doses of paracetamol (FDA Background). The ﬁrst three are the most contentious and are discussed below. The remaining four concern patients’ knowl- edge of paracetamol as well as the packaging, combinations with opiates, labelling and liquid paedi- atric preparations of paracetamol. These factors are less contentious and are discussed in subsequent sections on the options on which the committee voted. The most contentious factors are:  

a. ‘‘In some individuals, taking just a small amount more than the recommended total daily dose of paracetamol (  $\mathrm{4~g}$   daily) may lead to liver injury.’’ ‘‘Reference was made to the FDA’s Adverse Event Reporting System and the Acute Liver Failure Study Group who have claimed that ‘‘the median dose related to liver injury was 5–7.5 grams/day, very near the current maximum daily dose of 4 grams/day.’’ (FDA Background). It is further stated that ‘‘rare cases of acute liver injury have been linked to amounts lower than 2.5 grams per day’’ (FDA Background).  

b. ‘‘Some individuals may be especially prone to liver injury.’’ ‘‘Available data suggest that some individuals, especially those who use alcohol or have liver disease, may have a greater susceptibility to the effects of the toxic metabolite because they produce more of the metabolite or because they are unable to clear it from the body as easily.’’  

c. ‘‘It can be difﬁcult to recognise the onset of liver injury.’’  

2. Are these statements correct?  

a. Hepatotoxicity of therapeutic or near therapeutic doses.  

There is no doubt that single doses of more than about  ${10{-}15}~\mathrm{g}$   (  $150{-}200~\mathrm{mg/kg})$   paracetamol may lead to serious hepatotoxicity but the statements in the back- ground and discussions about hepatotoxicity during multiple dosage regimens of paracetamol, are inconsis- tent. Even statements above (1a and 1b) are unclear about paracetamol doses associated with hepatotoxicity. The lower limit of daily dosing of cases where paracet- amol-induced hepatotoxicity has occurred is variously listed as below  $2.5~\mathrm{g}$   and a little above  $4{\mathrm{~g~}}$   daily (FDA Background). One of the major published references in the background material concluded that ‘‘ … consistent use of as little as 7.5 g/day may be hazardous.’’ (Larson et al.  2005 ). The uncertainty regarding hepatotoxic doses during repeated dosing is also evident from the committee discussions. No comments highlighting this uncertainty as reﬂected in statements 1a and 1b were included in the background material, although the dif- ﬁculty of assigning the hepatotoxicity of paracetamol to therapeutic doses of the drug has been noted previously by Larson et al. ( 2005 ).  

Despite the lack of critical discussion on the hepato- toxicity to therapeutic or near therapeutic doses in the background document, Dart (FDA Transcript June 29) presented much data from  prospective  studies indicating that clinically signiﬁcant hepatotoxicity from thera- peutic doses of paracetamol is very rare. Furthermore, an increase in hepatic amino transfer as es in plasma may not be a precursor to more severe hepatotoxicity. In an ongoing study, approximately   $15\%$   of patients had increases in plasma amino transfer as es but the amino- transferase concentrations subsequently fell despite continued treatment with paracetamol (FDA Transcript June 29). Similarly, no signiﬁcant liver failure was observed in prospective studies on 30,865 patients although some patients did show elevated plasma con- centrations of amino transfer as es (Dart and Bailey  2007 ). Of these 30,865 patients, 4,263 were taking the maximal recommended dose of paracetamol   $(3.9–4~\mathrm{g}$   daily). Consistent with the safety of paracetamol, short term studies (3 days) on even supra therapeutic doses (6 and  $^\textrm{\scriptsize8g}$   daily) administered to healthy subjects found that paracetamol showed very slight increases in amino- transferases but no signiﬁcant hepatotoxicity (Temple et al.  2007 ). More recently, nearly 700 patients were given   $6~\mathrm{g}$   paracetamol daily for 3 days without any signiﬁcant liver impairment (den Hertog et al.  2009 ). Dart (FDA Transcript June 29) made some interesting  

claims concerning clinical histories from patients who had developed paracetamol-induced hepatotoxicity. The ﬁrst was that ‘‘Many clinicians explicitly refuse to write suicide or self-harm in their records because this may render the patient uninsurable in the future.’’ The second was that many patients changed their initial history after they had recovered from acute hepatotox- icity. Thus, there appear to be signiﬁcant barriers to obtaining truthful histories about paracetamol-induced hepatotoxicity.  

Conclusions about the hepatotoxicity of therapeutic doses of paracetamol have also come from many pub- lished case histories containing patients’ claims that they have taken only therapeutic doses. However, very thorough reviews contain summaries of many of these cases (Prescott  2000a ), particularly concerning combi- nations of paracetamol and alcohol (Dart et al.  2000 ; Prescott  2000b ). The overall conclusion was that tox- icity from doses of paracetamol within the therapeutic  

range has been exaggerated. However, hepatotoxicity from therapeutic doses cannot be eliminated totally as there may be rare patients who are susceptible to doses of paracetamol within the therapeutic range. Three patients are recorded to have developed hepatitis while taking paracetamol under  $4{\mathrm{~g~}}$   daily and subsequently had ele- vated amino transfer as es when rechallenged with low doses of paracetamol (Fabris et al.  2001 ; Johnson and Tolman  1977 ).  

b. Risk factors. As overdoses of paracetamol can cause hepatotoxicity, it is tempting to believe that liver disease is a risk factor for hepatotoxicity from therapeutic doses. However, short-term prospective studies indicate that paracetamol is well tolerated by patients with mild to severe cirrhosis (Benson  1983 ; Forrest et al.  1979 ). Furthermore, the metabolism of paracetamol appears normal in patients with cirrhosis although the half-life of elimination is prolonged by an average of   $75\%$   in patients with severe liver disease (Benson  1983 ; Zapater et al.  2004 ). In an authoritative textbook, it is recom- mended that paracetamol is the optimal analgesic in patients with chronic liver disease and doses of para- cetamol up to   $_{\mathrm{~1~g~}}$   three times a day are recommended (McIntyre  1999 ) and, for patients with liver disease, paracetamol is preferable to NSAIDs.  

Alcohol has been reported widely to increase the hepa- totoxicity of paracetamol. The FDA has mandated a warning about the dangers of paracetamol and alcohol. Every pack of paracetamol sold in USA bears the warning: Alcohol warning: If you drink three or more alcoholic beverages daily, you should ask your doctor whether you should take [product name] or other pain relievers. [Product name] may increase your risk of liver damage. However, this claim cannot be supported by thorough analysis of prospective studies and consider- ation of retrospective data (Dart et al.  2000 ; Prescott 2000b ). Dart et al. ( 2000 ) concluded that: ‘‘The answer to the question ‘‘Can administration of therapeutic doses of paracetamol cause hepatic injury in the alcoholic patient?’’ is no.’’ We agree with this conclusion.  

c. Difﬁculty in the recognition of liver injury. It is cer- tainly correct that paracetamol-induced hepatotoxicity may not be clinically apparent for a couple of days. Large single overdoses are often quickly identiﬁed by the patient, or their relations or friends and appropriate treatment with acetylcysteine can be commenced. Substantial hepatotoxicity should only occur if the overdose is not detected and treated quickly. As out- lined below, a large number of cases of severe hepatotoxicity are inadvertent and occur during long- term dosage but are probably precipitated by acute overdosage. Paracetamol-induced hepatotoxicity in  

these cases may very well be difﬁcult to detect by both patient and the physician may not request the appro- priate test of measuring plasma amino transfer as es because the early signs of impending hepatotoxicity are non-speciﬁc (e.g. vomiting). In many cases, the physician is not even consulted before substantial hepatotoxicity has developed.  

# 3. How common is paracetamol poisoning?  

a. USA. Various ﬁgures have been presented from USA. During 1990–1999 there were 26,000 hospital is at ions per year due to paracetamol overdose.   $74\%$   were reported as intentional,   $8\%$   described variously as accidental, inadvertent or unintentional and   $18\%$   as uncertain (Nourjah et al.  2006 ). In the last 3 years of this period there were 1,375 deaths identiﬁed in which a paracetamol-associated overdose was the underlying cause or a contributing cause. This equates to an average of 458 deaths each year. 1,010   $(73\%)$   were listed as intentional and 300   $(22\%)$   as unintentional, while   $5\%$   could not be classiﬁed. In more recent years, it has been reported that the proportion of inadvertent overdosage has increased, although this may be limited to severe overdoses. In an analysis of 275 cases of severe hepatotoxicity judged to be due to paracetamol, nearly half were noted to be due to intentional self- harm and a similar proportion were considered to be inadvertent (Larson et al.  2005 ).  

What are the reasons for inadvertent hepatotoxicity? The answers are not entirely clear but may include supra therapeutic dosing and the concurrent use of several paracetamol products, including combinations with opiates (Larson et al.  2005 ). In the inadvertent group,   $63\%$   were taking combinations of paracetamol and opiates, the most common being a combination of paracetamol and hydrocodone (Larson et al.  2005 ). We contend that confusion and forgetfulness may arise from the use of opiates or concurrent alcohol ingestion leading to inadvertent acute paracetamol overdosage during chronic therapeutic use of plain or compound analgesic products. Continuing chronic pain may also lead to paracetamol overdosage, particularly with ingestion of alcohol and opiates. Hepatotoxicity may result from paracetamol overdosage with combinations of paracetamol and opiates in patients who are abusing the combination for the opiate content. Combinations with opiates are discussed further under options 5a and 5b below.  

b. UK. It is widely stated that   $90–95\%$   of cases in UK are single large deliberate overdoses. The UK has very high rate of intentional overdose with approximately 60,000 hospital is at ions due to intentional poisoning  

per year, mostly involving paracetamol (Khan et al. 2006 ). The overwhelming majority of cases are reportedly due to products containing paracetamol alone. There is little data on inadvertent overdosage in UK, possibly because the high rates of intentional overdoses swamp the results on inadvertent hepato- toxicity.  

The relatively low rate of inadvertent overdose in the UK compared to the USA is difﬁcult to explain. It may be due to cultural responses to overdose, healthcare funding differences and consequent reporting pressures of the two systems. Prescription of paracetamol in USA is only possible with combinations of paraceta- mol and other drugs. This may be another reason for the varying patterns of paracetamol-induced hepato- toxicity in USA and UK and is discussed further below (options 5a and 5b).  

Our conclusion is that paracetamol is a useful anal- gesic and antipyretic agent but, at this stage, we do not have enough data to be sure about the reasons for the hepatotoxicity seen in many USA patients who claim they did not take excessive doses. However, the background summary presented to the committee is too deﬁnite in its attribution of therapeutic or near therapeutic doses being a common cause of the hepa- totoxicity seen with paracetamol.  

# 4. Options and voting  

Several options were put to the committee in the background material. Each option was accompanied by comments on ‘‘Current situation, Option, Intended effect, Considerations related to incidence of hepato- toxicity (liver injury) and Considerations related to implementation’’. Two separate votes were conducted. In the ﬁrst, the committee members could indicate one of three levels of agreement with the option: whether they agreed with the option and considered it to be a high priority or whether they agreed or disagreed with the option but without any expression of the level of their agreement or objection (Table  1 ). The second and subsequent vote was for each committee member to select the single most important option to decrease the hepatotoxicity of paracetamol. A total of 37 votes were cast. The voting is shown in Table  1 .  

From the transcripts, many of committee members commented on the difﬁculty of voting on the options because of the often inconclusive data and their inability to predict the consequences of changes in the dose sizes, packaging and, also, combinations of par- acetamol and other drugs. These difﬁculties are entirely reasonable.  

Option 1a. ‘‘Reduce the current dosage strengths (including the recommended maximum  

adult daily dose, the single and dosage strengths in over-the-counter (OTC) and prescription products).’’ The option was to reduce the tablet strength from 500 down to  $325~\mathrm{mg}$  , thus reducing the recommended single dose to   $650~\mathrm{mg}$  .  

Option 1b. ‘‘Restrict currently recommended maximum adult daily dose, single adult dose, and dose form strengths to prescription only status.’’ According to this option, only   $325~\mathrm{mg}$   tablets would be available OTC but higher strength capsules or tablets could be prescribed.  

The voting for this option was complex. Overall, a majority voted for these options although only a minority of the committee members (13 out of 37) considered that these options were the most effective changes to decrease the hepatotoxicity of paracetamol (Table  1 ).  

There are two aspects to these votes. Firstly, the voting indicates that many on the com- mittee considered that therapeutic or near therapeutic doses of paracetamol can be hepatotoxic. Thus, many on the committee were in agreement with comments in the FDA Background: namely that: ‘‘Paracetamol has a narrow margin of safety.’’ and, further, that the reduced dose: would ‘‘ … decrease the likelihood that patients will unintentionally exceed safe doses.’’ As outlined above, we contend that the hepatotoxicity of paraceta- mol in therapeutic or near therapeutic doses appears to be very rare (1a, Hepatotoxicity of therapeutic or near therapeutic doses). Even pre-existing liver disease and alcohol intake do not appear to precipitate the hepatotoxicity of therapeutic doses of paracetamol (1b, Risk factors).  

The second aspect is that the efﬁcacy of paracetamol will, on average, be reduced by the lower recommended dose. There is con- siderable literature on the relationship between the pain relief and the size of single doses of paracetamol. When tested for acute pain in adults, a dose of   $1{,}000~\mathrm{mg}$   of para- cetamol was superior to   $500~\mathrm{mg}$   (McQuay and Moore  2007 ). From the pooled results of these comparative trials, the number needed to treat (NNT) to achieve at least   $50\%$   pain relief was 9 (  $95\%$   conﬁdence interval, 6–20), i.e. on average, nine patients would need to be treated with the higher dose (  $^{1,000~\mathrm{mg}}$   in  

<td><table  border="1"><thead><tr><td rowspan="2"><b>Option</b></td><td colspan="4"><b>Votes</b></td></tr><tr><td><b>Yes, high priority</b></td><td><b>Yes</b></td><td><b>No</b></td><td><b>Highest single priority</b></td></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>la. Reduce current dosage strengths (including the recommended maximum adult daily dose, the single adult dose and dosage strengths in OTC and prescription products</td><td>11</td><td>10</td><td>16 </td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>Maximum OTC dose limited to 650 mg</td><td>12 </td><td>12 </td><td>13 </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1b. Restrict currently recommended maximum adult daily dose, single adult dose, and dosage form strengths to prescription only status</td><td>8</td><td>18</td><td>11</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Option 1 as a whole</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>2. Establish pack size limits on OTC paracetamol products</td><td>2 </td><td>15</td><td>20 </td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>3. Require unit-of-use packaging for prescription products</td><td>5</td><td>22</td><td>10 </td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>4. Expand product warning information on prescription products</td><td>25 </td><td>11</td><td>1</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>5a. Eliminate OTC combination products</td><td>2 </td><td>11 </td><td>24 </td><td>2 </td></tr><tr><td>5b. Eliminate prescription combination products</td><td>10 </td><td>10</td><td>17</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>6. Limit dosing formulations for OTC liquid products; require dosing device</td><td>19</td><td>17</td><td>1</td><td>7</td></tr></tbody></table></td>  

order to achieve  $50\%$   pain relief while eight patients would achieve the same degree of pain relief at a dose of   $500~\mathrm{mg}$   paracetamol (McQuay and Moore  2007 ). Similarly, a pooled analysis indicated that a paracetamol dose of   $1{,}000~\mathrm{mg}$   produced a greater relief of pain than lower doses (Weil et al.  2007 ). The potency of the antipyretic effects of paracet- amol has been less studied but the antipyretic effect of   $1{,}000~\mathrm{mg}$   paracetamol was signiﬁ- cantly greater than that of   $500~\mathrm{mg}$   (Bachert et al.  2005 ).  

Overall, we contend that the decreased dos- age will not signiﬁcantly alter the occurrence of inadvertent overdosage with paracetamol. The reduced efﬁcacy of the lower dose of paracetamol coupled with the removal of combination tablets of paracetamol and opi- ates may increase the utilisation of NSAIDs with the chance of greater morbidity and mortality (‘‘ Conclusion ’’). It was also pre- dicted that the decreased dosage would probably have only a modest effect on deliberate paracetamol overdose, similar to other measures, such as decreased pack size (Dargan, FDA Transcript June 30). The reduced content of paracetamol may very well become known to the public and patients may simply increase the number of tablets  

taken, particularly if the analgesic effect is inadequate. As far as we are aware, a reduced dose of paracetamol per tablet has not been recommended in any country, apart from USA.  

Option 2. ‘‘Establish package size limits for OTC prod- ucts.’’ A variety of options existed in this general option. These included limitation on the number of tablets per pack and the pack- aging in blister packs. Furthermore, the reduced amounts of paracetamol that ‘‘could be purchased at one time could reduce the incidence of overdose due to intentional injury’’. Stated disadvantages included the possibility of moving ‘‘consumers to use other analgesics to treat pain with their attendant risk of adverse effects’’.  

This option did not receive a majority vote but it did receive a substantial number of Yes votes (Table  1 ). From the discussions (FDA Tran- script June 29 it is clear that several members of the committee were very concerned about the availability of bottles of up to 1,000 tablets of paracetamol in USA (FDA Transcript June 30). The paracetamol tablets are loosely packed, i.e. not in blister or foil packs. These large packs, of course, contain many times the lethal doses of paracetamol. Some of the concern about these large packs may have come from the presentation by Kuffner (FDA Transcript June 29) who noted that the majority of overdoses in children were from loose packs of tablets.  

Limitations on pack size have been introduced in many countries but it is very difﬁcult to correlate changes in packaging and pack size with any change in the rates of hepatotoxicity from paracetamol. As part of the background to the committee, a document was prepared containing a summary of 15 papers on the rate of paracetamol-induced hepatotoxicity fol- lowing changes in UK (FDA Pack Size). The changes in the pack sizes of paracetamol in UK are complex with mandated and voluntary changes. However, one or two packs of 16 paracetamol tablets or capsules   $(500~\mathrm{mg})$   can be sold in non-pharmacy shops and pharma- cies, respectively. Pharmacists may dispense up to 100 tablets without a prescription but a prescription is required for more than 100 tablets (FDA Pack size). Most paracetamol is available as blister packs.  

Hawton (FDA Transcript June 30) presented evidence from the UK for larger doses of paracetamol being taken, usually for inten- tional overdose, from tablets in loose packs rather than blister packs. This was in the early 1990s when both packs were available before the introduction of the limitations on pack size. Decreased rates of mortality from overdoses from paracetamol have been noted after the limitations on pack size and blister packaging of paracetamol were introduced in 1998 in England and Wales (Morgan et al.  2007a ). However, there was a coincidental fall in the numbers of deaths from combinations of par- acetamol and other drugs (which were not covered by the regulatory changes). Further- more, there was also a decreased death rate from overdose of other drugs, such as antide- pressants (Morgan et al.  2007a ). The number of paracetamol tablets taken in overdoses decreased by about   $20\%$   after 1998 (Morgan et al.  2007b ). This is equivalent to about a  $2\ \mathrm{g}$  reduction in the ingested dose of paracetamol, again largely with intentional overdoses (Robinson et al.  2000 ). Although it is possible that restrictions on packaging may have reduced the death rate from paracetamol, the decrease appears to be small and less than regulators would have wished (Buckley and  

Gunnel  2007 ; Bateman  2009 ). To a large extent, patients taking intentional overdoses in UK (always the majority) have obtained mul- tiple small packs from different sources (FDA Transcript June 30). The effect of pack size on the rates of inadvertent overdose in UK is unclear because of the relatively low rates of overdose from this cause in UK.  

Option 3. ‘‘Require unit-of-use packaging for prescrip- tion products.’’ Unit-of-use packaging means the product comes to the pharmacy packaged ready for sale without having to be repack- aged. Many products come to pharmacies in bulk, enabling the pharmacist to repackage to suit individual patient needs.’’ (FDA Back- ground). This type of package means that standardised information, including adverse effects, would be included in every package. The voting for this option indicated that a majority of the committee considered that this option was advisable but was not a priority measure to decrease paracetamol-induced hepatotoxicity (Table  1 ).  

Option 4. ‘‘Expand product warning information on pre- scription combination products and prominently list paracetamol as product ingredient.’’ Many committee members deci- ded that this was a change that would decrease rates of hepatic damage from paracetamol (Table  1 ). The vote was higher than for option 3 indicating a greater reliance on labelling than on an information pamphlet in limiting hepa- totoxicity. It certainly seems advantageous to make it obvious which products contain para- cetamol by having clear labelling. Obviously, this should be the case in all countries.  

Option 5a. ‘‘Eliminate OTC combination paracetamol products.  

Option 5b. ‘‘Eliminate combination prescription para- cetamol products.’’ There was little voting for option 5a, which concerns the combina- tion of paracetamol in combination products marketed for the symptomatic relief of colds, etc. A slight majority of the committee voted in favour of option 5b and seven members of the committee considered that this option was the single most important measure to decrease the hepatotoxicity of paracetamol (Table  1 ). The voting for this measure, par- ticularly option 5b, may indicate a problem which is relevant very largely to USA,  

namely the very high usage of paracetamol in combination with hydrocodone, oxycodone or other opiate analgesics. The combination products were introduced in order to poten- tiate the analgesic activity of paracetamol and, at the same time, to allow the dosage of the opiate to be reduced. It is notable that in USA, all prescription paracetamol products are combinations. Tablets, capsules or sus- pensions containing only paracetamol are non-prescription items (FDA Transcript June 29). In 2005, the production of the various paracetamol products in USA was: 8 billion doses paracetamol only products, 9.7 billion doses of OTC combinations (for treatment of colds, etc.) and 11 billion doses of prescrip- tion only combinations with hydrocodone  $(62\%)$  , oxycodone  $(15\%)$  , propoxyphene  $(10\%)$   and codeine   $(7\%)$   (FDA transcript June 29). Only the combinations with codeine or dihydrocodeine are available in UK. The combination with dextro- propoxyphene was withdrawn in 2005 because of concern about the cardiorespira- tory toxicity of propoxyphene resulting from overdoses of the combination products.  

Hydrocodone is available only as a combi- nation product in the USA where it is a schedule III drug. Oxycodone is available as tablets containing oxycodone only and also in combination with paracetamol in USA, Canada and Italy. In USA, the combination is placed in schedule III, provided that the dose of oxycodone per tablet or capsule is no more than   $15~\mathrm{mg}$  . Formulations containing oxy- codone as the only active drug are placed in schedule II. Both schedules require pre- scriptions but the distribution of schedule II drugs requires greater surveillance of their distribution.  

Physicians in USA can recommend that their patients buy plain paracetamol tablets but the usage of combination tablets appears extraordinarily high. Major changes in the prescription of paracetamol and opiates will be required if the combinations of paraceta- mol and opiates are no longer available.  

Option 6. ‘‘Option 6. Limit dosing formulations for OTC liquid presentations; require dosing advice.’’ This option means that liquid suspensions would be restricted, probably   $160~\mathrm{mg}/5~\mathrm{mL}$  and would require the manufacturers to include  

a container (e.g. measuring spoon) which would allow accurate dosage. According to the description of the option: ‘‘This intervention targets the main cause of serious events from paracetamol use in children.’’ (FDA Back- ground).  

This option was well supported in both the ﬁrst and second voting schedules. This limitation on number of different strengths of paraceta- mol may very well decrease the confusion about the dosage of paracetamol to children and reduce the inadvertent toxicity from para- cetamol suspensions in children. However, as Kuffner (FDA Transcript June 29) has com- mented, this will not stop the most common cause of hepatotoxicity in children, namely the consumption of paracetamol from bottles con- taining loose tablets of paracetamol.  

# Conclusions  

The discussions and voting by the committee clearly indicated the widely varying views on measures to reduce the hepatotoxicity of paracetamol. Although there was no majority vote for any single highest priority measure, several options received considerable support (Table  1 ).  

In summary, the well-supported options can be divided into two groups:  

1. major recommendations which will, if implemented, greatly alter the OTC sales and prescription of paracetamol.

 2. recommendations concerning labelling and packaging.  

The cessation of the prescription of combinations of paracetamol and opiates was well supported by the com- mittee. The removal of these combinations will require very large changes in the management of patients with pain, particularly chronic pain. If the combinations are to be continued, the FDA as well as other drug information groups and organisations should greatly increase educa- tional programs on the problems of these combinations in order for their use to be managed much more carefully than at present.  

The second major recommendation is the reduced dos- age of paracetamol. This could lead to increased use of NSAIDs which generally show greater analgesic activity than paracetamol. Why is this a problem? At the FDA meeting, a   $20\%$   transfer of paracetamol to NSAIDs was estimated to lead to an additional 656 deaths annually in USA (FDA Transcript June 29). The aggregate effects from increased blood pressure, strokes, kidney damage and gastrointestinal haemorrhage is likely to far outweigh the beneﬁts from reducing the dosage of paracetamol or restricting OTC access. Furthermore, paracetamol does not interfere with the anti-platelet effect of aspirin, as occurs with the major NSAID, ibuprofen.  

These two major changes will be opposed by many groups and the FDA should consider these changes very carefully before they are introduced. We contend that inadvertent hepatotoxicity requires more detailed exami- nation by FDA. The conclusions of Dart et al. ( 2000 ), Dart and Bailey ( 2007 ) and Prescott ( 2000a ,  b ) concerning the hepatotoxicity of therapeutic doses of paracetamol require more careful examination by FDA before they can be accepted. The views of further toxicologists and senior physicians should be sought. Possibly, the change in dos- age suggested by Kuffner (FDA Transcript June 29) may provide an approach that could allow the continued avail- ability of   $500~\mathrm{mg}$   tablets. For the   $500~\mathrm{mg}$   tablets, he suggested that the dosing directions in the short term may be: ‘‘ … to take one tablet, and if pain or fever does not respond to one tablet, two tablets may be needed.’’ A similar change in dosage for chronic use could also be introduced. Prospective studies on the comparative effects of various long-term doses of paracetamol are, however, required.  

The clearer labelling and a standard strength of liquid preparations of paracetamol are relatively minor changes which were well supported by the committee. They appear very reasonable and it would be surprising if they were not adopted by FDA.  

Although not discussed at the meeting, even the avail- ability of paracetamol has been questioned, particularly as an OTC product. Lee ( 2004 ) noted: ‘‘It still must be asked: Is this amount of injury and death really acceptable for an over-the-counter pain reliever?’’ More recently, Brune et al. ( 2009 ) concluded that the availability of both para- cetamol and aspirin as over-the-counter preparations ‘‘ … poses an unacceptable risk to the general population.’’ A more common view is probably the one put forward by Krenzelok ( 2009 ) who was a member of the FDA committee. He stated that: ‘‘Few would dispute that para- cetamol is a therapeutic necessity and safe when used properly.’’ We consider that this is reasonable and that paracetamol should continue as both an OTC and pre- scription drug.  

For several options, it was noted that the changes in the content or packaging would require considerable costs to manufacturers because of the need for new formula- tions. These costs would likely be passed onto consumers. Is this likely to be a ‘big ticket’ item? The costs of bioavailability trials on the new formulations would be considerable but the extra costs should be amortized over a short time by the very large sales of paracetamol and the overall increase in costs to the consumer should be minimal.  

Acknowledgments Research projects of GG Graham and A Grau- dins on the mechanism of action and p harm a co kinetics of paracetamol, respectively, have been supported by GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd who market paracetamol. RO Day has been a member of an advisory group for GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd.  

# References  

Bachert C, Chuchalin AG, Eisebitt R et al (2005) Aspirin compared with acetaminophen in the treatment of fever and other symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection in adults: A multicenter, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, placebo- controlled, parallel-group, single-dose, 6-hour dose ranging study. Clin Ther 27:993–1003 Bateman DN (2009) Limiting paracetamol pack size: has it worked in the UK? Clin Toxicol 47(6):536–541 Benson GD (1983) Acetaminophen in chronic liver disease. Clin Pharmacol Ther 33:95–101 Brune K, Hinz B, Otterness I (2009) Aspirin and acetaminophen: should they be available over the counter? Curr Rheumatol Rep 11:36–40 Buckley NA, Gunnel D (2007) Does restricting pack size of paracetamol (acetaminophen) reduce suicides? PLoS Med 4(4):e152 Dart RC, Bailey E (2007) Does therapeutic use of acetaminophen cause acute liver failure? Pharmacotherapy 27:1219–1230 Dart RC, Kuffner EK, Rumack BH (2000) Treatment of pain or fever with paracetamol (acetaminophen) in the alcoholic patient: a systematic review. Am J Ther 7:123–134 den Hertog HM, van der Worp HB, van Gemert HMA et al (2009) The paracetamol (acetaminophen) in stroke (PAIS) trial: a multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase III trial. Lancet Neurol 8:434–440 Fabris P, Palma MD, de Lalla F (2001) Idiosyncratic acute hepatitis caused by paracetamol in two patients with melanoma treated with high-dose interferon-  $\cdot\alpha$  . Ann Intern Med 134:345 FDA Background.  http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Advisory Committees/ Committees Meeting Materials/Drugs/Drug Safety and Risk Management Advisory Committee/UCM164897.pdf . Accessed 22 January 2010 FDA Pack Size.  http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Advisory Committees/ Committees Meeting Materials/Drugs/Drug Safety and Risk Management Advisory Committee/UCM168619.pdf . Accessed 22 January 2010 FDA Transcript, June 29.  http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Advisory Committees/Committees Meeting Materials/Drugs/DrugSafetyand Risk Management Advisory Committee/UCM174697.pdf . Acces- sed 27 January 2010 FDA Transcript, June 30  http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Advisory Committees/Committees Meeting Materials/Drugs/DrugSafetyand Risk Management Advisory Committee/UCM174699.pdf . Acces- sed 27 January 2010 Forrest JA, Adriaenssens P, Finlayson ND, Prescott LF (1979) Paracetamol metabolism in chronic liver disease. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 15:427–431 Johnson GK, Tolman KG (1977) Chronic liver disease and acetami- nophen. Ann Intern Med 87(3):302–304 Khan SA, Shah N, Williams R, Jalan R (2006) Acute liver failure: a review. Clin Liver Dis 10:239–258 Krenzelok EP (2009) The FDA acetaminophen advisory committee meeting–what is the future of acetaminophen in the United  

States? The perspective of a committee member. Clin Toxicol 47:784–789 Larson AM, Polson J, Fontana RJ et al (2005) Acetaminophen- induced acute liver failure: results of a United States multicenter, prospective study. Hepatology 42:1364–1372 Lee WM (2004) Acetaminophen and the U.S. acute liver failure study group: Lowering the risks of hepatic failure. Hepatology 40:6–9 McIntyre N (1999) The general management of liver disease. In: Bircher J, Benhamou J-P, McIntyre N et al (eds) Oxford Textbook of Clinical Hepatology. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, pp 1917–1922 McQuay HJ, Moore RA (2007) Dose-response in direct comparisons of different doses of aspirin, ibuprofen and paracetamol (acetamino- phen) in analgesic studies. Br J Clin Pharmacol 63(3):271–278 Morgan OW, Grifﬁths C, Majeed A (2007a) Interrupted time-series analysis of regulations to reduce paracetamol (acetaminophen) poisoning. PLoS Med e105 Morgan O, Hawkins L, Edwards N, Dargan P (2007b) Paracetamol (acetaminophen) pack size restrictions and poisoning severity: time trends in enquiries to a UK poisons centre. J Clin Pharm Ther 32(5):449–455  

Nourjah P, Ahmad SR, Karwoski C, Willy M (2006) Estimates of acetaminophen (Paracetamol)-associated overdoses in the United States. Pharmacoepid Drug Saf 15:398–405 Prescott LF (2000a) Therapeutic misadventure with paracetamol: Fact or ﬁction. Am J Ther 7:99–114 Prescott LF (2000b) Paracetamol, alcohol and the liver. Br J Clin Pharmacol 49:291–301 Robinson D, Smith AM, Johnston GD et al (2000) Severity of overdose after restriction of paracetamol availability: retrospec- tive study. Br Med J 321:926–927 Temple AR, Lynch JM, Vena J et al (2007) Amino transfer as e activities in healthy subjects receiving three-day dosing of 4, 6, or 8 grams per day of acetaminophen. Clin Toxicol 45:36–44 Weil K, Hooper L, Afzal Z et al (2007). Paracetamol for pain relief after surgical removal of lower wisdom teeth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD004487 Zapater P, Lasso de la Vega MC, Horga JF et al (2004) Pharmaco- kinetic variations of acetaminophen according to liver dysfunction and portal hypertension status. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 20:29–36  