# Carcinosarcoma and Separate Carcinoid Tumor of theStomach  

A Case Report with Light and Electron Microscopic Studies  

MANJULABANSAL,MD,MAMORUKANEKO,MD,ANDRONALDE.GORDON,PHD  

A carcinosarcoma of the cardia of stomach is reported. This is a rare entity which is of further interest because of an associated but distinctly separate carcinoid tumor. The main tumor showed distinct a de no carcinoma to us and spindle cell components which collided in many areas. The sarcomatous nature of the spindle cell component was confirmed by ultrastructural studies.We have reviewed the literature andhavenot found a similarcase.  

Cancer 50:1876-1881, 1982.  

ARC IN O SARCOMA of the stomach was probably first described by Queckenstedt in1904.'A num- ber of cases have since beenaddedto the literature. Establishing the diagnosis of car cino sarcoma of the stomach,however,requires critical evaluation of all the qualifying criteria,namely,exclusion of aprimary else- where,andthepresenceandadmixtureofbothepithe lial and mesenchymal elements on light microscopic study,confirmedby ultrastructural study and special stains.²  

We have had the opportunity to study a case which notonlyfulfillstheabovecriteriabutisofaddedinterest because of an associated,but distinctly separate,car- cinoidtumor.This occurred in a 71-year-oldwhiteman who was treated by an e soph ago gast rec to my. We could not find a similar case in the literature.  

# Case Report  

A71-year-old whiteman was admitted to The Mount Sinai Hospital in November 1979 with several months history of progressive dys p hagia for solids,  ${\pmb l}\,3.6~\mathbf{kg}$  loss in three months poor appetite and general weakness.  

Anuppergastrointestinal  $\pmb{\chi}$  -rayseries,done at another hos- pital,revealed a large tumor mass arising from the stomach close to the e soph ago gastric junction.A gastric biopsy was reported as showing a de no carcinoma of the stomach.Onad- mission to Mount Sinai,his hemoglobin was  $11.6~\mathrm{g}/100~\mathrm{mh}$  and the alkaline phosphatase determination was normal.No abdominal mass was palpated.Barium enema and chest  $\pmb{x}$  -Tay were unremarkable.La paro to my was performed,andapiece of the gastric tumor was submitted for frozen section.The diagnosis of car cino sarcoma was suggested and a neso pha gogastrectomy,with reconstruction by stomach tube,wasper- formed. The liver was biopsied at the same time. Postoperative recoverywasuneventful,and thepatientwasdischarged.Che- mo therapy was started.However,the course was progressively downhill,due to widespread metastatic disease and nutritional problems and the patient died six months after surgery.Au- topsy was not performed.  

# Pathologic Findings  

There sec ted specimen consisted of the proxima l two thirds of the stomach, a small rim of distal esophagus, spleen, and omentum. A large polypoid exophytic 11.5  $\times\,7.5\times3.0$  cmtumorwas  $1.7\;\mathsf{c m}$  from the esophageal resection margin, on the posterior wall, and extended from the lesser to the greater curvature,almostentirely obstructing the gastric lumen (Fig. 1). The surface of the tumor was ulcerated and hemorrhagic,and,onsec- tion, the tumor was variegated, with greyish-pink, soft areas interspersed with irregular greyish-white, firm areas,and zones of necrosis and hemorrhage.Theentire thickness of the gastric wall was infiltrated and the ser- osa was congested, with fibrous thickening.  

A separate, large, plaque-like  ${\bf4.6\times4.0\;cm}$  ulcerated lesion was on the anterior wall,  $3.0\,\mathtt{c m}$  from the greater curvatureand  $3.5~\mathsf{c m}$  fromthe main tumor(Fig.1). The edges were in du rated,rolled,and slightly elevated.  

and the lesion consisted of greyish-white,firm tissue infiltrating the entire thickness of the wall. Correspond- ingtothislesion,these rosa was puckered with a few fibrous adhesion s.  

Theremainder of the gastric mucosa was un remark- able.Several0.5to  $1.5\;\mathtt{c m}$  lymph nodes were along the greater and lesser curvature; some of these nodes were completely replaced by greyish-white,soft tumor tissue.  

I he spleen was moderately enlarged, weighing 388 g. The capsule had patchy fibrous thickening and the parenchyma was congested. A few grossly unremark- able lymph nodes were found at the splenic hilum. The omentum was grossly unremarkable.  

Histologically,the surface of the large polypoid tu- mor was distinctly papillary. In the depth of the tumor, the histology varied greatly.In addition towell-differ- entiated a de no carcinoma to us areas, characterized by small tubular structures,there were moderately differ- entiated tubular and papillotubular areas, extremely anaplastic foci, characterized by small round to polyg onal cells with scattered bizarre giant cells, and spindle cells arranged in interlacing bundles (Fig. 2). These components were intermixed throughout the tumor, although the papillotubular and spindle cellelements were most prominent. In some areas, the spindle cell elementwassharplydemarcatedfromthecarcinoma- tous areas (Fig. 3). The spindle cell nuclei were vesic- ular,oval to elongated,with frequent mitoses, and the cytoplasm was indistinct and interspersed with collagen fibers.  

The separate flat ulcerated tumor was composed mainly of small uniform cells arranged in ribbons. Mitotic figures were infrequent, although more ana- plastic areas resembling oat cell carcinoma were oc-  

  
FiG. 1. Gross photograph of the specimen showing a large, polypoid ex oph y tic tumor on the left and a separate,flat,ulceratedtumor on theright.  

  
FiG. 2. The large tumor showing both a de no carcinoma to us and spindle cell components.Both components are sharply demarcated (H&E,  $\times100.$  

  
FiG.3.Spindle cells arranged in interlacing bundles.A mitotic figureinthecenter（H&E,  $\times100$  一  

  
FiG.4.A portion of car cino idaltu mor showing an anaplastic feature resemblingoatcellcarcinoma（H&E,  $\times100$  

casionally encountered (Fig. 4). Argyrophilic, intracy- to plasm ic granules were demonstrable in this tumor with the Grime lius method.The tumor invaded veins and lymphatic channels extensively,andseverallymph nodes were replaced by car c in oid oro at cell-likecom- ponents.Theliverbiopsyshowedmetastaticadenocar- cinoma.  

For ultrastructural study,tissue from each of the tu- mors was minced into  $_{1-2\;\sf{m m}}$  pieces and immediately immersed in  $3\%$   glutaraldehyde with  $0.2~\bf{M}$  Na caco- dylate, buffered at  $\mathbf{pH}\ 7.4$  After overnight fixation, the tissue was washed in  $\mathbf{0.2\M}$  Na cacodylate buffer and then treated with  $1\%$   cacodylate buffered osmium te- troxide for 1 hour. The tissue was serially dehydrated with ethanol and embedded in Epon 812. Thin sections were cut on an LKB IlI ultramicrotome, stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and examined with a JEOL 100CX electron microscope.  

Weusedtheelectronmicroscopetoelucidatethe nature of the spindle cells of the larger polypoid tumor and to confirm the car cino i dal characteristics of the second tumor.  

Spindle cells were surrounded by patches of basement membrane, frequently adjacent to plasma membrane densities (Fig. 5). The nuclei were elongated with ir- regular borders and appeared twisted.The cytoplasm contained dilated granular endoplasmic reticulum,ran domly dispersed polyribosomes, a few lysosomal gran- ules, a few long slender mitochondria, many microtu- bules oriented along thelong axis of the cell,andmany microfilaments. The most prominent cytoplasmic fea- ture was the organization of the microfilaments into structures resembling dense bodies of normal smooth muscle cell. These dense bodies were most often found close to the periphery of the cell, but could also be seen deepinthecytoplasm.Anoccasionalpinocytoticvesicle was present at the membrane surface and rare des-  

  
FiG.5.Electron mi- cro graph of a portion of a cell from lesion A.The nucleus is elongated and clefted,giving the im- press ion that it is twisted. Themostprominentfea ture of the cytoplasm is the abundance of micro- filaments which form densebodies(smallar- row)toward the cell pe riphery.Patches ofbasal lamina(largearrow) sometimes associated with hemi des mo some type structures arepresentat the cell perimeter. Stained with ur any lac- e tate and lead citrate  $(\times13{,}200)$  

  
FIG.6.An electron micro graph showing cells from lesion B.The cells have round or oval nu- clei with irregular bor- ders.Substantial heter- ochromatin 1S seen clumped at the peri ph eryofthenucleus.A continuous basallamina (large arrow) isseen surrounding gthetumor nests. The cytoplasm contains dilated granu- larendoplasmicreticu lum  $(^{\star})$  ,small round or ovalmitochondria（M) and small electron-dense haloed granules (small arrows primarily near the basal lamina)(Sec tions stainedwith uranyl acetate and lead citrate,  $\times13{,}200)$ ，  

mosomes were observed between adjacent cells. The matrix between cells primarily consisted of individual collagenfibers and collagenbundles.  

The cells of the second tumor were in large nests surrounded by abasement membrane;alumenwasnot discernible.The nuclei were round to oval and indented with irregular borders. The nuclei contained one to two prominent nucleoli, substantial peripheral heterochro- matin, and aggregates of virus-like particles (Fig. 6). The cytoplasm contained dilatedgranular endoplasmic reticulum,a few small round to oval mitochondria and some lys oso mal granules.Most cells showed variable numbers of small membrane-bound homogenous gran- ules,averaging  $150\;\mathrm{nm}$  in diameter,with electron-dense core surrounded by an electron-lucent halo. The gran- ules were most abundant in the cytoplasm adjacent to the basement membrane.  

# Discussion  

Car cino sarcoma is an uncommon entity.Claessen and Mathias? found that over one-half of the 73 cases reported,upto1921,had developed from female sexual organs.SaphirandVass\*reviewed 153 cases of so- called carcinosarcoma, reported by 1938, and found the organs most commonly involved to be in order off re- quency, the uterus, ovary, breast, thyroid,esophagus, stomach, larynx, lung, and urinary tract. Kitamura? dividedgastriccarcinosarcomasintothreetypesac- cording to their gross presentation:(A) predominantly intramural infltration;（B)extension of tumor beyond theserosa;and(C)predominantly intramural mass as cauliflower-like projections and/or a crater shape.The case reported here belongs to Kitamura'sTypeC  

Car cino sarcoma is associated with a low incidence of metastases but a high rate of mortality.Itisinter- esting to note that there has not been a significant dif- ference in the incidence in the 30years prior to and the 25 years after 1938.Men,usually older than age 50 years (age range, 27-74 years), are affected predomi- nantly.6 The average age is lower than that for gastric carcinoma. Most of the cases described occurred in the case was in the cardia. Clinical diagnosis is impossible and can only be made at operation or at autopsy.6  

Histologically, carcinosarcoma consists of both epi- thelialandsarcomatouselements.Meyer’andFould\* each suggested that this type of tumor can be divided into three types: collision (Type I), in which there is a sharp interface between distinct his to logic patterns  

<td><table  border="1"><thead><tr><td colspan="2"><b>Histologic no.</b></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td><b>No.</b></td><td><b>Author and year</b></td><td><b>Age* / sex</b></td><td><b>Location</b></td><td><b>Classificationt</b></td><td><b>Gross pattern classification</b></td></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td colspan="2">Group I: Collision tumor</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">1. J Battaglia, 195115</td><td>74/M</td><td>Lesser Curvature</td><td>?</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Gotting, 193116</td><td>38/M</td><td>Pylorus</td><td>?</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">3. 1 Hijikata, 1950, cited6</td><td>56/F</td><td>Pylorus</td><td></td><td>!</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">4. 1 Kaneko and Nakazawa, 193717</td><td>61/M</td><td>Pylorus</td><td>?</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">5. Kawano, 1933, citedb</td><td>55/M</td><td>Pylorus</td><td>?</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">6. 1 Konjetzny, 1921, cited6</td><td>60/F,</td><td>Pylorus</td><td>A</td><td>!</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">7.  Sato, 1954, cited6</td><td>53/M</td><td>Pylorus</td><td>9</td><td>!</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">8. S Schubach, 1931, cited°</td><td>52/M</td><td>Third of upper part of stomach</td><td>c</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">9. S Shimo, 1938, cited°</td><td>49/M</td><td>Entire stomach</td><td>A</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Group II: Combination tumor</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">10. Arganaras and Rigdon, 19632</td><td>70/M</td><td>Pylorus</td><td></td><td>I!</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">II. Konjetzny, 192118</td><td>60/M</td><td>Pylorus</td><td>c</td><td>!!</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">12. Lindemann, 1908, citede</td><td>46/M</td><td>Pylorus</td><td>A</td><td>I!</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">13. Nagashina, 1963, citede</td><td>49/M</td><td>Entire stomach</td><td>A</td><td>!!</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">14. Saito, 1916, citeds</td><td>27/F</td><td>Entire stomach</td><td>A</td><td>1I</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">15. Tanimura and Furuta, 19676 16. I Bansal e! al., present case,</td><td>65/F</td><td>Cardia</td><td>c</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">1981</td><td>71 /M</td><td>Cardia</td><td>c</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">1981</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Group III: Composition tumor</td><td>?</td><td>Cardia</td><td>c</td><td>?</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">18. Citedc</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">17. Furukawa, 1943, cited6</td><td>46/F</td><td>Lesser curvature</td><td>c</td><td>I!I</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">18. Citedc</td><td>37/M</td><td>Pylorus</td><td>A</td><td>I!I</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">19. Hara and Hirai, 1953, citede</td><td>40/M</td><td>Pylorus</td><td>8</td><td>I!I</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">20. Cited6</td><td>40/F</td><td>Entire stomach</td><td>B</td><td>IHI</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">21. Kitamura, 19495</td><td>54/F 40/M</td><td>Lesser curvature</td><td>B</td><td>I!I</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">22. Kyogoku et al., 1960, citede</td><td>45/M</td><td>Pylorus</td><td>c</td><td>I!!</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">23. Nakatani et al., 1951, citede</td><td>?</td><td>Cardia</td><td>A</td><td>II</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Group IV: Unclassified tumor</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">24. Queckenstedt, 1904'</td><td>54/F</td><td>Pylorus</td><td>3</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">25. Otani, 1949, cited6</td><td>39/F</td><td>?</td><td>?</td><td>?</td></tr></tbody></table></td>


\*Age range was 27-74years;mean,51.7years. beyond the serosa; C: predominantly intramural mass. ↑ A: predominantly intramural infltration; B: extension of tumor  

with no or minimal mixing; combination (Type I1),in which the two components mix completely without maintaining discrete strom al components;andcompo- sition (Type II1), in which the two components mix but maintain recognizable stromal differentiating features.6 Stout et al.? and Bergmann et al.'° have recognized the improbability,in most cases,of separating Fould's Types II and III. We have, however, grouped the tumor into four classifications (Table 1). Metastases may show either the carcinomatous or sarcomatous pattern, or both. In general, it has been stated that metastases from car cino sarcoma occur later than those from carcinoma, and are especially rare in collision tumors."  

Whether or not the spindle cell component represents a true sarcoma rather than spindle cell anaplasia of carcinoma has been a source of debate.Virchow'2and Herxheimier'3 thought that a primary carcinoma could stimulate excessive strom al growth resulting in car ci- nosarcoma. When the stromal growth reaches the ma- lignant stage, usually the sarcomatous component is overwhelming. Willis doubted the existence of true car- cinosarcoma and suggested that"most of the alleged instancesareclearlyonlycasesofpleomorphismincar- cinoma."14  

Inourcase,study of the ultra structure of the spindle cell element of the large, polypoid mass demonstrated several bundles of microfilaments within the cytoplasm. In some areas, these cells had dense bodies which were bothcloseto thesurface and deep within the cytoplasm, thus confirming the true mesenchymal nature of the spindlecells.Whether all these elements differentiated from a single to ti potential primitive cell or different cell lines, occurring simultaneously or sequentially, remains unclear. What is clear, however, is that the spindle cells display distinct mesenchymal characteristics and that, in this case, a true carcinosarcoma has been docu- mented. Furthermore, electron microscopy of the dis- tinc t ly separate car c in oid tumor showed typical neu rosecretory granules,and the lymph nodes contained only metastatic carcinoid tumor.  

# REFERENCES  

1.Queckenstedt HHG.Ueber:Karzinosarkome.Leipzig,F.Goober （publisher)1904.52p.booklet. 2.Arganaras E,Rigdon RH.Carcinosarcoma of the stomach. Gas tr 0 enter ology 1963;44:322-329. 3.Claessen M,Mathias E.Carcinosarcoma.Bruns Beit F Klin Chir1921;123:584-599. 4.Saphir O,Vass A.Carcinosarcoma.AmJ Cancer1938;33:331- 361. 5.Kitamura S.Study on carcinosarcoma of stomach.Gann1950; 41:15 -25. 6.Tanimura H,Furuta M.Carcinosarcoma of the stomach.Am JSurg 1967:113:702-709. 7.Meyer R.Beitrag zur Verstandiag uber die Namengebung in der Geschwulstlehre.ZentralblAllgPathol1919-1920;30:291-296. 8.Fould L.The his to logical analysis of tumors:A critical review. AmJCancer1940;39:1-24  

9.Stout AP,Humphreys GH,Rottenberg LA.A caseofcarci- nosarcoma of theesophagus.Am JRoentgenol 1949;61:461-469. 10.Bergman M,Ackermann LV,Kemler RL.Carcinosarcoma of thelung:Review of the literature and report of two cases treated by pneumonectomy.Cancer1951;4:919-929. 11. Latrive JP. Rare gastric malignant tumors. Rev Prat 1978; 28:3509-3512. 12.VirchowR.DiekrankhaftenGeschwilste,vof2Berlin1864. 1865.A.Hirschwald. 13.Herxheimier G.DerCarcinomasarcomatodesNebstBeschrei bungeineseinschlagigen:TumorsdesOesphagus.BeitrPatholAnat 1908;44:150-176. 14.Willis RA.Pathology of Tumors.St.Louis:C.V.Mosby,1948 15.Battaglia S.ZurKenntnis der Kollisionstumoren des Magens. Krebsarzt1951;6:129-138. 16.Gotting P.Ueber Kollisionstumoren:Beitrag zur Frage des Carcinosarkoms.FrankfurtZischrPathol1931;44:107-119. 17.KanekoJ,Nakazawa T.E in Fal iv on Carcinos ark ondes Ma gens. Gann 1937; 31:426-429. 18.Konjetzny GE.DasMagensarkom.ErgebChir.Orthop1921; 14:256-260.  