# Physiology and Impact of Horizontal Connections in Rat Neocortex 

Philipp Schnepel ${ }^{1,2}$, Arvind Kumar ${ }^{1,2}$, Mihael Zohar ${ }^{1,2}$, Ad Aertsen ${ }^{1,2}$,<br>and Clemens Boucsein ${ }^{1,2}$<br>${ }^{1}$ Bernstein Center Freiburg, Freiburg 79104, Germany, and ${ }^{2}$ Neurobiology and Biophysics, Faculty of Biology,<br>University of Freiburg, Freiburg 79104, Germany

Address correspondence to Philipp Schnepel, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California Berkeley, 142 Life Sciences Addition, Berkeley, CA, 94520-3200, USA. Email: pschnepel@berkeley.edu


#### Abstract

Cortical information processing at the cellular level has predominantly been studied in local networks, which are dominated by strong vertical connectivity between layers. However, recent studies suggest that the bulk of axons targeting pyramidal neurons most likely originate from outside this local range, emphasizing the importance of horizontal connections. We mapped a subset of these connections to L5B pyramidal neurons in rat somatosensory cortex with photostimulation, identifying intact projections up to a lateral distance of 2 mm . Our estimates of the spatial distribution of cells presynaptic to L5B pyramids support the idea that the majority is located outside the local volume. The synaptic physiology of horizontal connections does not differ markedly from that of local connections, whereas the layer and cell-type-dependent pattern of innervation does. Apart from L2/3, L6A provides a strong source of horizontal connections. Implementing our data into a spiking neuronal network model shows that more horizontal connections promote robust asynchronous ongoing activity states and reduce noise correlations in stimulus-induced activity.


Key words: cortical network, horizontal connections, laser uncaging, noise correlation, pyramidal neuron

## Introduction

The neocortex of mammals is organized into layers parallel to its surface, each showing distinct anatomical, morphological, and cellular properties (Mountcastle 1998). This organization is believed to help control the input-output flow of the neocortex, and its structural and functional features have been the subject of decades of detailed research, providing sufficient data to formulate general connectivity schemes that suggest major pathways for information transfer and processing across the different layers of the neocortex (Thomson and Bannister 2003; Douglas and Martin 2004). These schemes focus on vertical connectivity and have spawned tremendous efforts in implementing the respective circuits into computational models (Markram 2006). The importance of connectivity along the vertical axis of neocortical networks is suggested by the high connection probability that has been found along this axis (Deuchars et al. 1994; Markram et al. 1997; Holmgren et al. 2003; Song et al. 2005; Yoshimura and Callaway 2005; Thomson and Lamy 2007; Lefort et al. 2009; Kätzel et al. 2011; Levy and Reyes 2012), and which may suggest a dominant role for local information processing within the neocortex. However, over the years, evidence (mostly from anatomical studies) accumulated showing that nonlocal projections must provide a substantial fraction of inputs to neocortical cells (Burkhalter 1989; Hellwig 2000; Binzegger et al. 2004; Stepanyants et al. 2009). Even though first attempts have been made to characterize the physiology of nonlocal projections in the neocortex (Yoshimura et al. 2000; Berger et al. 2009), as well as in other brain regions, for example, the hippocampus or olfactory bulb (Sayer et al. 1990; Malinow 1991; Pressler and Strowbridge 2006; Atasoy et al. 2008), available data remain very limited, probably due to the low data yield achievable with the available methods.




---



Figure 1. Calibration of the stimulation parameters for uncaging experiments. (A) Cells in all layers were directly stimulated with light flashes to determine the minimal

 layer borders. The pixel values code for the normalized mean number of APs. (C) Averaged excitation profiles from all layers with overlaid reconstructions of recoverable neurons, same color-code as in (B). One pixel represents $75 \times 75 \mu \mathrm{m}^{2}$. Data are presented for control conditions (lower row) and with D-AP5 (upper row). (D) Spatial resolution $R$ of photostimulation. For L6, the spatial resolution is significantly increased with D-AP5 ( $P<0.01$ ). (E) PDs used for functional mapping experiments as determined from minimal stimulation experiments. The stimulation strength used for both conditions (control/D-AP5) is not significantly different for all layers $(P>0.05)$. (F) The average number of APs per profile is markedly reduced with D-AP5 in L5A and L5B ( $P<0.05$ ), which is primarily due to a reduction in the number of bursts per pixel. (G) Mean number of APs during repeated stimulation of the same neuron. Without D-AP5, there is a clear rise in excitability, leading to a decrease in resolution over time when using the uncaging approach.

In this study, we focus on a subset of nonlocal projections in the neocortical circuit often termed "horizontal projections." This definition usually includes intra-cortical, intra-areal, longrange projections, which can span several millimeters and mostly run parallel (but also obliquely for cross-layer connections) to the cortical surface. Functionally, horizontal projections within the neocortical network have been implicated in spreading information to motor or higher sensory areas (Wang and Burkhalter 2007; Matyas et al. 2010; De Pasquale and Sherman 2011; Mao et al. 2011), in mechanisms like surround suppression (Adesnik et al. 2012; Sachdev et al. 2012) and as modulators of neural responses, providing "contextual" information from the same and other cortical areas (Behabadi et al. 2012; Petreanu et al. 2012). Furthermore, in carnivores and primates, horizontal projections seem to link populations of cells that share the same stimulus preference over large distances, for example, iso-orientation columns in V1 (Bonhoeffer and Grinvald 1991; Weliky and Katz 1994). Since rodents often lack this clear structural organization, the question arises, whether, in addition to the roles assigned so far, horizontal connections may play a more general role in cortical processing. In the light of recent estimates suggesting that the majority of synaptic connections ( $\sim 75 \%$ ) a neuron receives actually originates from outside the local volume (Stepanyants et al. 2009; Boucsein et al. 2011), it has been hypothesized that horizontal projections could even dominate cortical network dynamics. Finally, these projections may also serve to reduce noise correlations (Cohen and Kohn 2011) and trial-bytrial variability (Arieli et al. 1996; Churchland et al. 2010) and thereby improve signal detection. To elaborate on such a hypothesis, a more detailed description of horizontal projections is warranted in order to advance our understanding of cortical processing.

We show that horizontal projections onto L5B pyramids in rat somatosensory cortex are numerous and exhibit a layer-specific pattern that can depend on postsynaptic cell type. We characterize the physiological properties of these connections and find the strongest projections to L5B pyramids originating in L2/3 as well as L5B and L6A. Including our findings in spiking neuronal network simulations revealed that horizontal projections could, indeed, help to reduce noise correlations and response variability and, thus, improve signal detection in the neocortex.

## Materials and Methods

## Preparation of Brain Slices

Parasagittal slices ( $300 \mu \mathrm{m}$ thickness) of somatosensory cortex were prepared from Long Evans rats ( $\mathrm{P} 25-\mathrm{P} 35$ ), stored at $33^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$ for 1 h , and then transferred to a custom-made recording chamber. The cutting angle $\left(10^{\circ}\right)$ was optimized such that apical dendrites were aligned parallel to the slice surface. The slices were constantly superfused at a flow rate of $6 \mathrm{~mL} / \mathrm{min}$ with artificial cerebro-spinal fluid (ACSF) containing (in mM): $125 \mathrm{NaCl}, 2.5 \mathrm{KCl}$, $1 \mathrm{MgCl}_{2}, 2 \mathrm{CaCl}_{2}, 25 \mathrm{NaHCO}_{3}, 1.25 \mathrm{NaH}_{2} \mathrm{PO}_{4}$, and 25 glucose, pH 7.4, gassed with carbogen $\left(95 \% \mathrm{O}_{2}, 5 \% \mathrm{CO}_{2}\right)$ at a temperature of $32-35^{\circ} \mathrm{C}$. All chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich if not otherwise noted. Animals were treated according to the University of Freiburg's and German guidelines for the use of animals in research.

## Electrophysiology and Histology

Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings were established from excitatory neurons in all layers of S1 (hind limb/trunk area) using standard procedures. Pipettes pulled from borosilicate glass (1.5 mm outer diameter, Hilgenberg; 2-5 M $\Omega$ ) were filled with a solution containing (in m M ): 125 K-gluconate, $20 \mathrm{KCl}, 10$ HEPES, $2 \mathrm{MgCl}_{2}, 0.5 \mathrm{CaCl}_{2}, 2 \mathrm{Na}_{2} \mathrm{ATP}, 5$ EGTA, and $0.4-0.8 \%$ Biocytin,




---



Figure 2. Functional mapping of horizontal connectivity (A) A region $\sim 2 \mathrm{~mm}$ to each side of the somato-dendritic axis of the postsynaptic cell (black cell) was scanned. When APs were elicited in cells with an intact projection onto the postsynaptic cell (white cells), a postsynaptic potential was detected. Stimulation of presynaptic cells close to the postsynaptic cell's dendrite led to mixed responses (cyan cell). (B) Typical functional map of a postsynaptic L5B-pyr overlaid on the transmission light image taken during the experiment. The layer of origin of the projection is color-coded (same color assignment used in all following figures). Marked positions correspond to the EPSP-traces in C, whereas the black box marks the region displayed in $\mathbf{D}$. The approximate contour of the dendritic tree of the L5B-pyr was spared from stimulation (empty pixels). (C) Mean postsynaptic responses from the activation of presynaptic cells (pre1 and 2) display fast onsets after long latencies, whereas direct/ambiguous (cyan) or mixed (cyan/black) responses typically show slower rising phases and shorter latencies (arrows). (D) Averaged postsynaptic potentials recorded after stimulation; identified projections are marked in red/magenta (black: no response, pale: direct stimulation, strong responses are clipped), scale bars are 50 ms and 1 mV . Gray lines denote layer borders. ( $\boldsymbol{E}$ ) Calculation of the relative connection probability as the ratio between tested and connected/ambiguous positions in bins of $100 \mu \mathrm{m}$ from $n=28$ experiments. Positions containing presynaptic cells are marked as 1 (connected), 0 (not connected), or 0.5 (ambiguous). Grayed-out positions denote bins that contained more than $20 \%$ of ambiguous responses and were excluded from further analysis. ( $\mathbf{F}$ ) Distance-dependent number of tested (white) and connected (red) positions pooled over all experiments and layers. Green fraction denotes ambiguous positions included in the fitting whereas grayed-out areas denote distances excluded from analysis according to our rejection criteria (see Materials and Methods). (G) Identified locations of presynaptic cells from all mapping experiments (black triangles: postsynaptic L5B-pyr). Black horizontal lines denote the normalized layer borders. We found a total of 2260 intact projections up to 2 mm lateral to the somato-dendritic axis of the postsynaptic L5B-pyr. Filled circles indicate projections used for fitting $(\boldsymbol{n}=\mathbf{1 0 8 3})$ whereas pale, open circles indicate excluded projections according to our rejection criteria. (H) Relative connection probability ( $\mathrm{P}_{\text {rel }}$ ) as determined in $\mathbf{E}$ fitted with an exponential function (filled circles: values used for fitting; open circles: rejected bins; gray area: 95\% confidence interval for decay constant $\lambda$ ). For L6B, there were not enough data points to robustly fit the decay ( $\boldsymbol{n}=\mathbf{1 8}$, dashed line), but the fit is depicted for completeness. (I) The direct comparison of $\lambda$ from each fit shows that L2/3 and L6A have the largest extent of horizontal connectivity for L5B-pyr. Error bars denote $95 \%$ confidence interval of the fits from $\mathbf{H}$.
adjusted to pH 7.3 with KOH . If not otherwise noted, all recordings were performed in current-clamp mode (AxoClamp2B, Molecular Devices or BVC-700A, Dagan), low-pass filtered at 3 kHz , and digitized at 20 kHz (CED 1401 Plus, Cambridge Electronic Design). The access resistance was routinely monitored, and the recording was discarded if it surpassed $40 \mathrm{M} \Omega$. The pipette capacitance was compensated for via the capacitance neutralization circuit of the amplifier. The liquid junction potential $(-13 \mathrm{mV})$ was not corrected for. After recording, slices were fixed in $4 \%$ paraformaldehyde overnight. Biocytin-filled cells were visualized using standard procedures (Horikawa and Armstrong 1988). Only cells whose dendritic tree was largely preserved in the slice were included in the analysis and reconstructed with a conventional microscope equipped with a camera lucida module (Dialux22, Zeiss), if staining quality was sufficient (21 of 49 for excitation profile experiments, see below). In order to classify L5B pyramidal neurons (L5B-pyr) according to dendritic morphology, basic morphological parameters (number of apical branches, trunk width at $5 \mu \mathrm{m}$ from the soma, 2D soma size, cf. Gee et al. 2012) from a subset of well-stained neurons ( 14 of 52 ) were extracted (cf. Supplementary Fig. 1).

## Imaging and Microscopy

Experiments were performed on an infrared video-microscopy setup (Dodt and Zieglgänsberger 1998) equipped with gradient contrast optics (DGC, Luigs\&Neumann) and an infrared-optimized CCD camera (FViewII-IR, Olympus), mounted on a motorized BX-51WI microscope (Olympus). All spatial measurements were acquired from the microscope micromanipulators (LNSM1 or 5, Luigs\&Neumann) using a custom written MATLAB (Mathworks) software package (available from Luigs\&Neumann on request). Laminar landmarks were visualized under brightfield illumination (especially the borders of L2/3, L4, L5A, and L5B) at a low magnification ( $2 \times$ objective, NA 0.06 , PlanN, Olympus), and these cytoarchitectonic features were used to define laminar borders for the generation of a layered stimulation pattern covering the visible part of the slice (horizontal extent: $\sim \pm 2.5 \mathrm{~mm}$, see Fig. 2B). Since the border between L5B and L6 is not distinguishable at $\times 2$ magnification, it was measured at $\times 40$ magnification (LUMPlanFL N, NA 0.8, Olympus) as the region where the size of cell bodies markedly drops (Tanaka et al. 2011).




---


Figure 3. Synaptic physiology of horizontal projections. (A) Selected presynaptic locations were repetitively stimulated, and postsynaptic EPSPs were recorded. (B) Subset of stimulated projections to a postsynaptic L5B-pyr (black) overlaid with the transmission light image taken during the experiment. Average postsynaptic response strength is color-coded, white pixels denote false-positives identified with offline sorting, white squares (pre1 and 2) mark the positions where stimulation led to the responses shown in C. (C) EPSPs evoked by activating putative monosynaptic projections. Blue bars mark stimulation; scale bars are 50 ms and 1 mV . Extraction of physiological parameters was performed on single trials (lower panels, scale bars are 10 ms and 0.5 mV ), the gray dashed line denotes the amplitude and the green solid line the 20-80\% rise time of the EPSP. In case of bursts of EPSPs, only the first response was taken into account. (D) EPSP amplitudes versus distance (upper row) and EPSP amplitude distributions (lower row) for each layer and all layers pooled (black, rightmost panels). The linear regression shows that the decay in EPSP amplitude for distances larger than $300 \mu \mathrm{m}$ is not significant for all layers except L5A ( $P<0.05$; black empty squares, mean $\pm \mathrm{SD}$; gray squares were not used for fitting; bin size: $100 \mu \mathrm{m}$ ). The shape of the amplitude distribution is consistent with that known for local projections (mean: solid line; median: dashed line). (E) EPSP rise times versus distance for each layer and all layers pooled (black, rightmost panel). The linear regression shows that the rise time in Layers $2 / 3,5 B$, and 6 decreases significantly for distances larger than $300 \mu \mathrm{m}$ (same notation as in D).
than 1 synaptic contact per connection (Markram et al. 1997), our numbers fit reasonably well to the mean number of asymmetric synapses on L5B-pyr (17567, Larkman 1991), considering that extra-cortical projections (e.g., inter-hemispheric) and projections to the distal dendrite (between 20\% and 35\% of all synapses, Larkman 1991) are not accounted for in our experiments. Although the density of found projections close to the postsynaptic neuron is high (Fig. 4B), our calculation suggests that at least $50 \%$ of all projections do not originate within the local volume, due to the quadratic increase in the number of potential presynaptic partners (Fig. 4A, cf. Boucsein et al. 2011). In addition, we found a separation in terms of contribution between layers on a larger spatial scale (Fig. 4C). According to our estimates, the dominant source of input to L5B is Layer L2/3 followed by L5B and L6A (which contribute equally) whereas the other layers provide less input (Fig. 4D).

Although we assumed homogeneity of connectivity in the above-mentioned model for the sake of simplicity, previous studies have stressed striking differences in local projection patterns to L5B-pyr that can depend on subcortical projection targets (Brown and Hestrin 2009; Anderson et al. 2010; Kiritani et al. 2012), pre- and post-synaptic neuron identity (Song et al. 2005; Kampa et al. 2006), vertical position within the layer (Petreanu et al. 2009), and firing pattern/morphological class (Schubert et al. 2001). We investigated the dependence of the pattern of horizontal projections on the firing pattern of L5B-pyr. We divided our data set according to the observed firing behavior in response to depolarizing current injections into regular- and doublet-spiking (RS, DS) as well as intrinsically bursting (IB) neurons (Fig. 5A). Interestingly, the population of L5B-pyr was rather homogeneous with respect to dendritic morphology ("thicktufted" type, Supplementary Fig. 1, cf. Schubert et al. 2001 for barrel cortex). The spatial connectivity patterns of RS- and DS-cells are comparable with the pooled data set (Fig. 5B). In contrast, IB cells seem to be lacking horizontal projections from L5B/L6A, while receiving more input from L2/3 than RS/DS-cells. To quantify these differences, we divided the connectivity space of these 3 types of neurons into 3 regions of interests, the supragranular, granular, and subgranular regions, and computed the average number of found horizontal projections for each of these 3 regions (Fig. 5C). We found that, indeed, IB cells received significantly fewer connections from the subgranular layer ( $P<0.01$,




---



Figure 4. (A) Representation of cortical space under simplified assumptions of homogeneity and isotropy. The cylinders represent the 3 different distances from the postsynaptic cell (gray: $250 \mu \mathrm{m}$, the local network or "column"; blue: $500 \mu \mathrm{m}$, the extent of the axonal plexus of L5B neurons; yellow: $2000 \mu \mathrm{m}$, extent of our measurements) used for our estimations on the numbers of connected neurons. The total number of cells increases in a quadratic fashion with distance (right panel, black curve), whereas the connection probability decreases exponentially (red curve). (B) The normalized density plot of all identified projections depicts the predominance of L2/3 and L5B/L6A projections for distances $>500 \mu \mathrm{m}$. (C) Cumulative display of the estimated number of connected cells ( $\mathrm{N}_{\mathrm{con}}$ ) as derived from the data in Figure 2 (see Table 1 for parameters). The local network ( $<250 \mu \mathrm{m}$ ) only provides a small fraction of the overall input to L5B-pyr. The curves depicting the estimates of connected cells from each layer separate with increasing distance, showing that L2/3 and L5B/L6A provide most of the synaptic input to L5B-pyr. The overall number of connected cells was estimated to be 5159. (D) Change in layer-resolved relative contribution to the total synaptic input with distance. In the local network ( $<250 \mu \mathrm{m}$ ), L5B provides the second largest source of synaptic input, whereas the contribution of L6A starts to dominate that of L5B with increasing distance.

KW-test) as compared with RS- or DS-cells (Fig. 5C). The 3 cell types did not differ, however, in their connectivity from the supragranular and granular layers. These results suggest that IB cells may be part of a different subnetwork, possibly integrating different streams of information.

## Functional Consequences of Large Space Constants of Inter- and Intra-Layer Connectivity

What could be the functional role of the horizontal connections characterized above? Since they seem to be abundant and of considerable synaptic strength, we implemented a spiking network model parameterized with the space constants from our experimental findings and used it to investigate the impact of horizontal connections on key parameters of network activity. Our first hypothesis was that increasing the number of horizontal connections (or, to increase the space constant of connection probability $\sigma_{\text {net }}$ ) should have an impact on the spatio-temporal correlations in the network activity, since the most prominent sources of correlations in the spiking activity in a network are shared inputs (Perkel et al. 1967; Shadlen and Newsome 1998) and the available pool of independent presynaptic units should increase. In our network simulations, we kept the total input to a given neuron (and, likewise, the total output) fixed and systematically increased $\sigma_{\text {net }}$ (Fig. 6A), which, indeed, reduced global synchrony (Fig. 6B). Note that an increase in $\sigma_{\text {net }}$ without controlling for total synaptic input to the neurons would have made the comparison of activity dynamics in networks with different $\sigma_{\text {net }}$ difficult. For the smallest $\sigma_{\text {net }}$ of 0.1 , we observed typical synchronous and asynchronous activity regimes as the external excitatory input $\left(v_{\text {ext }}\right)$ and the ratio of recurrent inhibition and excitation $(g)$ was varied (Brunel 2000; Kumar et al. 2008). In line with previous results, asynchronous activity states dominated the regimes with a high recurrent inhibition/excitation ratio (Fig. 6E). In these regimes, a further dilution of the shared input pool cannot be expected to show an effect on noise correlations due to the overall low correlations. However, for a smaller ratio of recurrent inhibition and excitation $(g=2)$, we observed strong synchronization with increasing $v_{\text {ext. }}$. Thus, to study the effect of $\sigma_{\text {net }}$ on global synchrony, we fixed $g=2$ and varied $\sigma_{\text {net }}$ systematically. Indeed, the global synchrony decreased as a function of $\sigma_{\text {net }}$ (Fig. $6 F, G$ ), whereas the overall firing rate did not change (Fig. 6C,D) because we kept the in- and out-degrees of the neurons fixed. For some parameter values where we observed strong synchrony (e.g., $\mathrm{FF} \geq 10$ ), increasing $\sigma_{\text {net }}$ reduced the synchrony by up to 30\% (Fig. 6F,G). With weak synchrony in the network, changing $\sigma_{\text {net }}$ did not influence network synchrony much (Fig. 6H).

## Trial Variability Decreases with Connectivity Space Constant

An important aspect of synchrony is that it causes large membrane potential fluctuations and, hence, can introduce large variability in the response to external stimuli (Arieli et al. 1996). Thus, our second hypothesis was that a larger $\sigma_{\text {net }}$ should reduce the trial-by-trial variability. To test this, we stimulated 500 neurons within the network described above with an additional external input (cf. Materials and Methods). The external input was modeled as a rate modulation in the activity of a pool of 1000 neurons outside of the network, also arranged on a 2 D sheet. The 2D spatial arrangement of neurons allowed us to




---



Figure 5. Differential analysis of the data set according to firing patterns of L5B-pyr. (A) Example neurons that were classified as "regular spiking" (RS), "doublet spiking" (DS), or "intrinsically bursting" (IB) according to the analysis of the inter-spike-interval of their responses to step current injections (see Hedrick and Waters 2012 for details). (B) Normalized density plots as in Fig. 4B for the 3 cell-classes. RS- as well as DS-cells receive horizontal projections mainly from L2/3, L5B, and L6A. For IB cells, the L5B/L6A input is weak at larger distances. Gray brackets denote regions of interest (ROI) for analysis in C. (C) Comparison of the mean number of found horizontal projections (weighted by the number of experiments in each group) to the 3 types of cells from subgranular, granular, and supragranular layers. These results show that IB cells receive significantly less input from subgranular layers (KW-test, $P<0.01$ ).
connect the input neurons to the receiving neurons in the recurrent network with a connection probability that decayed with distance. For this inter-layer connectivity, the connection probability decreased exponentially as a function of distance with a space constant $\sigma_{\text {stim }}^{\text {space }}$. In the 6-layered architecture of the sensory neocortex, this extra input can be thought to represent input from a presynaptic layer. Thus, this model allows us to investigate the effect of the local, intra-layer connectivity space




---



Figure 6. (A) Scheme of the cortical network model. 50000 neurons ( $80 \%$ excitatory, pale blue dots; $20 \%$ inhibitory, orange dots) were arranged in a grid on a 2D-sheet. The spatial connectivity profiles of excitatory (netspace, blue) and inhibitory neurons (orange) are shown on top and bottom, respectively. The space constant of the stimulus projection (stimspace, green) is shown on the right side. Different saturation levels refer to different space constants. In every simulation, 500 neurons ( 400 excitatory and 100 inhibitory, schematically marked with blue circles) received external input in addition to the background Poisson inputs. (B) Two examples showing raster plots of network activity with a small space constant (left panel) and a larger space constant (right panel). The blue dots refer to spikes from excitatory neurons whereas the orange dots refer to those from inhibitory neurons. The corresponding average population firing rate is shown in the bottom row. (C) Average firing rate in the network as a function of external excitatory input $\left(v_{\text {ext }}\right)$ and the ratio of recurrent inhibition and excitation $g$, for netspace $=0.1$. (D) Average firing rate in the network at a given $g$ $(g=2$, the only value tested that gave substantial synchrony; see Panel E) as a function of netspace and external excitatory input. Changing the space constant does not affect average firing rates. (E) Global synchrony (Fano Factor) in the network as a function of external excitatory input and the ratio of recurrent inhibition and excitation $g$, for netspace $=0.1$. Substantial synchrony only develops with $g=2$. ( $F$ ) Global synchrony in the network as a function of netspace and external excitatory input for $g=2$. Synchrony decreases monotonically as a function of netspace. (G) Relative change in the synchrony as a function of netspace for $g=2$. The synchrony for netspace $>0.1$ was normalized with the synchrony value at netspace $=0.1$. Warmer line colors refer to higher total values of synchrony. The actual value of the synchrony for netspace $=0.1$ is shown on the side. When there is synchrony in the network, increasing the space constant reduces the synchrony. (H) Same as in $G$, but for synchrony values of $g>2$. When there is only little synchrony in the network, increasing the space constant does not alter synchrony.
constant (here modeled as netspace) and the inter-layer connectivity space constant (here modeled as stimspace). This relates to our experimentally measured values of horizontal connectivity in such that netspace would refer to $\lambda_{\text {L5B }}$ whereas stimspace would refer to $\lambda$ of a presynaptic layer (e.g., L2/3 or L6A). Therefore, to study the effect of local connectivity and inter-layer or stimulus connectivity space constants, we systematically varied netspace and stimspace while keeping the other parameters constant (Fig. 7A). These simulations confirmed our hypothesis that increasing netspace reduced trial-by-trial variability (Fig. 7B-D). In these simulations, both netspace and stimspace were identical. Interestingly, for a fixed netspace, trial-by-trial variability decreased as we increased stimspace (Fig. 7E). These simulations allow us to speculate on the trial-by-trial variability in different layers of the sensory neocortex. For instance, in a layer with small netspace, we would expect higher trial-by-trial variability which, however, could be reduced if projections from the presynaptic layers have larger space constant. We note, however,




---



Figure 7. Trial-by-trial variability of the stimulus response in the recurrent network. (A) Stimulus response of a locally connected random network. Top: raster diagram of spiking activity. Spikes of the stimulated cells ( 400 excitatory and 100 inhibitory neurons) are marked in dark blue and red. Pale dots refer to neurons that were not stimulated (gray bars denote stimulation epochs). Corresponding population average firing rate is shown below. (B-D) Average firing rates of the stimulated neurons. The pale blue traces show 10 individual trials whereas the dark blue trace is the average of the 10 trials. Only the response of excitatory neurons is shown. The purple trace shows the average input, which was identical in all cases. The recurrent excitatory and stimulus space constants are specified on top of each panel. (E) Pseudocolor map of the variance of the trial-by-trail responses for an identical stimulus as a function of netspace and stimspace. Increasing both results in a reduced trial-bytrail variability, whereas netspace is the more effective parameter.
that the effects of shared connectivity as shaped by netspace could be restricted to the asynchronous-irregular and synchronous-irregular states of the network activity. Oscillatory dynamics of the network may not be affected in a qualitatively similar manner by connectivity space constants (see Yger et al. 2011). In neocortical networks, the space constants of the local, intra-layer connectivity can be different from the inter-layer connectivity (Thomson and Lamy 2007). In our simulations, we observed that while netspace had a stronger effect, stimspace could also reduce the trial-by-trial variability (Fig. 7E). Thus, our simulation results show that large space constants of the excitatory connectivity in the recurrent network and input projections together can create conditions suitable for minimizing noise correlations and reducing trial-by-trial variability.

## Discussion

We have shown that the number of horizontal projections onto L5B-pyr in rat S1 can be large and that the layer-specific connectivity pattern can depend on postsynaptic cell type. The physiological properties of these projections are comparable with those of local ones, with the strongest projections originating in L2/3 as well as L5B and L6A. Incorporating our data into spiking neuronal network simulations suggests that horizontal projections could contribute to reducing noise correlations and response variability and, therefore, improving signal detection in cortical networks.

## The Fraction of Local versus Nonlocal Projections

Anatomical data show that the number of nonlocal projections should balance or even outweigh the amount of local projections (Stepanyants et al. 2009). Functionally, the data presented here support this prediction from anatomy, resulting in a similar estimation that at least $50 \%$ of the synapses a neuron receives originate from outside the local network (Boucsein et al. 2011). In very local populations of neurons, connection probability does either not decrease with distance (Song et al. 2005; Berger et al. 2009; Lefort et al. 2009) or is reasonably well approximated by an exponential decay or the falling part of a Gaussian function (Holmgren et al. 2003; Boucsein et al. 2011; Levy and Reyes 2012). In L5B, connections between L5B-pyr and particularly trans-laminar connections from L2/3 to L5B dominate (Thomson and Lamy 2007), which is also reflected in our data for horizontal projections. Additionally, we identified L6A $\rightarrow$ L5B horizontal connections as a comparatively large source of synaptic input, which is surprising, since even local, vertical L6 $\rightarrow$ L5B connections have been reported to be very sparse (Mercer et al. 2005; Lefort et al. 2009). Along these lines, L4 $\rightarrow$ L5B projections are usually reported to be sparse and vertically confined (Lübke et al. 2000; Egger et al. 2008; Lefort et al. 2009; Petreanu et al. 2009). The L4-projections found in our study have a surprisingly large horizontal extent $(\lambda=265 \mu \mathrm{m})$, which is in accordance with findings from sensori-motor cortex such as the hindlimb area (Kaneko 2013). However, our estimations of their contribution to L5B-pyr-connectivity imply a rather small impact of these projections, since the overall number of connections is rather low ( $\sim 5 \%$ of all connections, cf. Fig. 4D). Furthermore, our qualitative analysis of cell-type-dependent differences in the connectivity profile of L5B-pyr suggests that specificity also exists on larger spatial scales, arguing for the processing of different streams of information in specific subnetworks of neurons (Kampa et al. 2006; Brown and Hestrin 2009; Kiritani et al. 2012).




---

Yang W, Carrasquillo Y, Hooks BM, Nerbonne JM, Burkhalter A. 2013. Distinct balance of excitation and inhibition in an interareal feedforward and feedback circuit of mouse visual cortex. $J$ Neurosci. 33:17373-17384.

Yger P, El Boustani S, Destexhe A, Frégnac Y. 2011. Topologically invariant macroscopic statistics in balanced networks of conductance-based integrate-and-fire neurons. J Comput Neurosci. 31:229-245.

Yoshimura Y, Callaway EM. 2005. Fine-scale specificity of cortical networks depends on inhibitory cell type and connectivity. Nat Neurosci. 8:1552-1559.

Yoshimura Y, Sato H, Imamura K, Watanabe Y. 2000. Properties of horizontal and vertical inputs to pyramidal cells in the superficial layers of the cat visual cortex. J Neurosci. 20:1931-1940.

Yousef T, Bonhoeffer T, Kim D-S, Eysel UT, Tóth É, Kisvárday ZF. 1999. Orientation topography of layer 4 lateral networks revealed by optical imaging in cat visual cortex (area 18). Eur $J$ Neurosci. 11:4291-4308.

Zhang Z-W, Deschênes M. 1997. Intracortical axonal projections of lamina VI cells of the primary somatosensory cortex in the rat: a single-cell labeling study. J Neurosci. 17: $6365-6379$.




---

