bearing electron-withdrawing groups (Table 1, entry 4) afforded a better yield than those bearing electron-donating groups (Table 1, entries 2 and 3) when   $4.6\%\mathrm{Au}/\mathrm{IRMOF}{.}3$   catalyst was used, however, the employment of   $0.6\%\mathrm{Au}/$  /IRMOF-3 (Table 1, entry 17  vs.  16) and   $3.2\%\mathrm{Au}/\mathrm{IRMOF}{.}3$   (Table 1, entry   $22\ \nu s$  . 21) gave the opposite results. The   $\mathrm{A}^{3}$    coupling reaction was reported to be highly affected by the nature of aldehydes, and the reactivity of aldehydes could be affected by the employed catalyst.   Kidwai  et al.  found that aryl aldehydes possessing electron-withdrawing groups afforded a better yield than that with an electron-donating group bound to the benzene ring which required longer reaction time with metallic Au nanoparticles as catalyst.   Wei and Li reported that both aromatic and aliphatic aldehydes were able to undergo the corresponding   $\mathrm{A}^{3}$  coupling with the catalyst of   $\mathrm{{\calAu}B r}_{3}$  .   They found that electronwithdrawing groups displayed high reactivities, however, electron-rich groups bound to the benzene ring decreased the reactivity and required a longer reaction time. The decreased yield for aliphatic aldehydes was caused by the tri meri z ation of aliphatic aldehydes with homogeneous gold salts. Zhang and Corma found that benz aldehyde with electron-donating groups react smoothly, while substitution of electron-withdrawing groups on the benzene ring decreases the reactivity with the catalyst of  $\mathrm{{Au}/C e O_{2}}$  . 14   Based on the above results, we may presume that the activity difference could be due to the different properties

 ( e.g. , different oxidation states) between   $4.6\%\mathrm{Au}/\mathrm{IRMOF}{.}3$   and

  $0.6\%\mathrm{Au}/$  IRMOF-3,   $3.2\%\mathrm{Au},$  /IRMOF-3 catalysts. With the catalyst of   $4.6\%\mathrm{Au}/$  /IRMOF-3, the reaction with secondary amines proceeded smoothly to afford the corresponding prop a rgy la mines (Table 1, entries 1, 7 – 9). Among the various amines tested, alicyclic amines such as piperidine, pyr ro li dine, and morpholine gave good conversions of benz aldehyde, whereas the diethyl amine afforded a lower conversion. This was probably due to the iminium ions generated from alicyclic amines and benz aldehyde which are more stable than that generated from dialkyl amine and benz aldehyde.  

Avariety of aromatic alkynes were coupled with benz aldehyde and piperidine in the presence of the   $4.6\%\mathrm{Au}/$  IRMOF-3 catalyst. It was found that straight-chain alkyl substituted phenyl acetylene showed decreasing conversion of benz aldehyde with increasing chain length, the conversions were   $86.4\%$  ,   $70.6\%$  , and   $28.5\%$   for methyl, ethyl, and butyl phenyl acetylene, respectively (Table 1, entries 10 – 12). Clearly, when increasing the steric hindrance of alkynes, it gave a decrease in conversion. The reaction was found to be highly affected by the steric hindrance of the alkynes, which was probably ascribed to the limitation effect of the IRMOF-3 channels. Aliphatic alkynes such as 1-octyne and (tri methyl sil yl)acetylene also afforded moderate conversions of benz aldehyde with   $62.1\%$   and   $56.6\%$  , respectively (Table 1, entries 13 and 14).  

The re usability studies of  $4.6\%\mathrm{Au}/\mathrm{IRMOF}{.}3$  ,  $0.6\%\mathrm{Au}/$  IRMOF-3, and   $3.2\%\mathrm{Au}/$  /IRMOF-3 were carried out on the   $\mathrm{A}^{3}$  coupling reaction of benz aldehyde, piperidine, and phenyl ace tylene. The results are summarized in Table 2. The fresh   $4.6\%\mathrm{Au}/$  