Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common form of inherited intellectual disability, affecting 1:5,000 males and 1:6,000 females worldwide (1). FXS is caused by a CGG repeat expansion in the promoter region of fragile X mental retardation gene,  FMR1.  More than 200 repeats of CGG lead to hyper methyl ation and silencing of the gene, causing the loss of fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP). In    ${<}1\%$   of FXS individuals, absence of FMRP is caused by mutations in the coding region of  FMR1  (1). Males with FXS display intellectual disability (IQ ranging between 20 and 70) and a broad spectrum of symptoms including physical abnormalities (macro orchid is m, prominent ears, elongated face and hyper extensible ﬁnger joints), and behavioral (anxiety, social avoidance and hand clapping), cognitive (executive functioning, visual-spatial processing and develo p mental delay), and neurological (epilepsy and disrupted sleep patterns) deﬁcits ( Table 1 ). Because the disease is X-linked, females with a full mutation are less affected than males, with an average IQ of 75–80 (1). Several animal models of FXS have been developed, including  Drosophila, mouse, and rat ( Table 1 ; see sidebar titled Animal Models of Fragile X Syndrome for details). In recent years, numerous pre clinical and clinical studies have been carried out to develop and test novel therapeutics for FXS (2). In this review, we describe the latest advances in understanding the molecular basis of the disease pathogen es is and highlight the emerging therapeutic potential of the anti diabetic drug metformin.  

Many neuro psychiatric symptoms of FXS are thought to be a consequence of dys regulated protein synthesis at the synapse (3). FMRP is an RNA-binding protein, targeting a sub population of neuronal mRNAs (1, 4). The cardinal function of FMRP is repression of translation, mainly of genes encoding synaptic plasticity-related proteins (1, 4). The absence of FMRP leads to  