Student motivation and engagement 429  

the number of outcome variables (11) to yield a revised sign i can ce criterion level of .005 (rounded).  

These results show that there are gender differences on a number of facets of motivation. Generally, these ﬁndings are consistent with the hypothesis that girls reﬂect a more adaptive pattern of motivation and engagement. In terms of adaptive dimensions, girls are sign i cant ly higher than boys in their valuing of school, mastery orientation, planning, study management and persistence. In terms of impeding and maladaptive dimensions, girls are sign i cant ly higher than boys in anxiety while boys are sign i cant ly higher in self-handicapping and disengagement. Year level ﬁndings broadly conﬁrm hypotheses that middle high school students seem to reﬂect a less adaptive pattern of motivation and engagement. Findings in relation to failure avoidance are qualiﬁed by an interaction effect. That is, gender differences on these dimensions change as a function of year grouping. Follow-up simple effects tests show that boys are sign i cant ly higher than girls on failure avoidance in junior high school, but in middle and senior high school there are no signiﬁcant gender differences on failure avoidance.  

The present study adopted a construct validation approach to examining multidimensional motivation and engagement through an assessment of within- and betweennetwork validity. In terms of within-network validity, (1) the data conﬁrm the good ﬁt of  