et al. 2007; Glick & Fiske 1996). Kanekar (2007) goes on to suggest that, in India compared to America, victims of rape and sexual assault are treated more harshly by society. This suggestion is supported by Nayak et al. (2003) who found that American students were more positive, or less negative, about sexual assault victims than Indian students.

The present findings support hypothesis 2. Scores on AMI and ASI for both Indian males and females correlated significantly with, _r_(249) =.57, \(p\) <.001 for men, _r_(247) =.80, \(p\) <.001, for women and _r_(498) =.63, \(p\) <.001 for the total sample (Table 3).

Hypothesis 3 states that Indian women would score higher than men in Benevolent Sexism. In the present study, a significant gender difference was found in Hostile Sexism and Benevolent Sexism (using MANOVA), wherein males scored higher in both Hostile Sexism, _F_(1, 498) = 23.6, \(p\) <.001, and Benevolent Sexism, _F_(1, 498) = 6.2, \(p\) =.01, on the ASI scale (see Table 4), implying that men endorse both hostile and benevolent sexism more than women among present Indian sample, thus supporting hypothesis 3.

In the study by Glick et al. (2000), similar to the present finding, men across 19 nations had scored significantly higher in Hostile Sexism. However, a higher Benevolent Sexism score of males was found only in Australia, Brazil, the Netherlands, Spain, South Korea, and the United States. In the three African countries, namely, Botswana, Nigeria, and South Africa females scored significantly higher on Benevolent Sexism. Glick stated that the more people in a nation endorse traditional gender attitudes (whether about women or men), the more women endorse Benevolent Sexism relative to men, even to the point of endorsing Benevolent Sexism more strongly than men in few nations. Through endorsing Benevolent Sexism, women justify the Patriarchal social systems that they belong to, even though they are essentially supporting their own disadvantages in society (Glick & Fiske, 2001; Russo et al., 2014). In this way, women are adaptively able to convince themselves that the society they are part of is desirable and acceptable, and ultimately reduce the emotional distress of being oppressed (Sibley et al., 2007).

Thus, based on the present findings and previous findings it can be stated that cross

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{c c c c} \hline  & ASI-AMI & HS-HM & BS-BM \\ \hline Total &.63*** &.25*** &.26*** \\ Men &.57*** &.30* &.47*** \\ Women &.80*** &.46** &.22 \\ \hline \end{tabular}

* p<.05. ** p<.01; *** p <.001. Note: ASI – Ambivalent Sexism Inventory; AMI – Ambivalence towards Men Inventory; HS – Hostile Sexism; HM – Hostility towards Men ;BS – Benevolent Sexism; BM – Benevolence towards Men; for data on other countries refer to Glick et al. (2004).

\end{table}
Table 3: Correlations of AMI and ASI Scale for Indian Respondents