Table 2. There were no statistically significant differences between groups.

_Biochemical_, _haemodynamic and subjective responses to the Stroop test_

The data are reported as the maximum value obtained (peak) and the peak\(-\)baseline (P\(-\)B) for each group in Table 3. Although samples were taken to assess plasma NA on four occasions after the Stroop test, the peak response was usually at 3 min post test.

The P\(-\)B response was much reduced in the melanochic/psychotic group compared to the others. However, the Kruskal-Wallis test did not demonstrate any statistically significant difference between the four groups with respect to peak NA (\(H=0\): 3, \(df=3\), \(p=0\): 96) or P\(-\)B (\(H=3\): 46, \(df=3\), \(p=0\): 32).

For all subjects, plasma NA values were summated after the stress testing (\(+\) 3, \(+\) 10, \(+\) 20, \(+\) 30 min), to give an indicator of sustained plasma NA values after the Stroop. There was no statistically significant difference between the four groups for the summated plasma NA value (\(H=0\): 25, \(df=3\), \(p=0\): 97). There was no statistically significant difference in peak NA and P\(-\)B response between males and females, for the total group or depressed patients alone.

The maximum values for pulse and blood pressure are given in Table 4 by group. Because of technical problems not all patients had automated haemodynamic measurements. There was no statistically significant difference in pulse between the four groups. There was a strong trend for a significant difference with respect to maximum systolic blood pressure (\(H=7\): 1, \(df=3\), \(p=0\): 07) and maximum diastolic blood pressure (\(H=7\): 4,

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c c c c} \hline  & Hamilton & Hamilton & Spielberger & Plasma & Plasma \\  & Depression & Anxiety & Trait & noradrenaline & cortisol \\  & Scale & Scale & & _(pg/ml)_ & _(mmol/1)_ \\ \hline Melancholic/psychotic & & & & & \\ depression (\(n=13\)) & 25:5 \(\pm\) 6: 3 & 20:8 \(\pm\) 7: 1 & 48:2 \(\pm\) 12: 5 & 302:0 \(\pm\) 307: 4 & 461:9 \(\pm\) 151: 1 \\ Non- melanacholic & & & & & \\ Depression (\(n=14\)) & 23:5 \(\pm\) 5: 0 & 21:3 \(\pm\) 5: 6 & 55:4 \(\pm\) 7: 2 & 323 \(\pm\) 327: 3 & 394:7 \(\pm\) 98: 6 \\ Generalised anxiety & & & & & \\ disorder (\(n=16\)) & 16:4 \(\pm\) 5: 7 & 22:5 \(\pm\) 8: 8 & 56:4 \(\pm\) 10: 2 & 300:9 \(\pm\) 261: 4 & 405:5 \(\pm\) 170: 8 \\ Controls (\(n=20\)) & — & — & 33:3 \(\pm\) 5: 2 & 221:3 \(\pm\) 182: 3 & 373:5 \(\pm\) 109: 9 \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2. Baseline clinical ratings and biochemical variables (mean \(\pm\) SD)

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l c c} \hline  & Maximum plasma & Peak-baseline plasma \\  & noradrenaline & noradrenaline \\ \hline Melancholic/psychotic depression & & \\ (\(n=13\)) & 366:1 \(\pm\) 300: 2 & 30:6 \(\pm\) 99: 9 \\ Non-melancholic depression & & \\ (\(n=14\)) & 417:0 \(\pm\) 444: 5 & 125:1 \(\pm\) 271: 3 \\ Generalised anxiety disorder & & \\ (\(n=16\)) & 427:3 \(\pm\) 375: 2 & 126:3 \(\pm\) 248: 0 \\ Controls & & \\ (\(n=20\)) & 431:2 \(\pm\) 547: 5 & 209:9 \(\pm\) 580: 0 \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3. Maximum and peak-baseline plasma noradrenaline (pg/ml) after Stroop test (mean \(\pm\) SD)