# Network-Guided GWAS Improves Identification of Genes Affecting Free Amino Acids ${ }^{1}$ [OPEN] 

Ruthie Angelovici*, Albert Batushansky, Nicholas Deason, Sabrina Gonzalez-Jorge, Michael A. Gore,<br>Aaron Fait, and Dean DellaPenna<br>Division of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211 (R.A., A.B.); Department of<br>Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824 (N.D., S.G.-J.,<br>D.D.); Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom (S.G.-J.); Plant<br>Breeding and Genetics Section, School of Integrative Plant Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14854<br>(M.A.G.); and French Associates Institute for Agriculture and Biotechnology of Drylands, Jacob Blaustein<br>Institutes for Desert Research, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Midreshet Ben-Gurion, Israel 84990 (A.F.)<br>ORCID IDs: 0000-0001-5150-0695 (R.A.); 0000-0001-5562-0731 (A.B.); 0000-0002-0783-1929 (S.G.-J.); 0000-0001-6896-8024 (M.A.G.);<br>0000-0002-9073-8441 (A.F.).


#### Abstract

Amino acids are essential for proper growth and development in plants. Amino acids serve as building blocks for proteins but also are important for responses to stress and the biosynthesis of numerous essential compounds. In seed, the pool of free amino acids (FAAs) also contributes to alternative energy, desiccation, and seed vigor; thus, manipulating FAA levels can significantly impact a seed's nutritional qualities. While genome-wide association studies (GWAS) on branched-chain amino acids have identified some regulatory genes controlling seed FAAs, the genetic regulation of FAA levels, composition, and homeostasis in seeds remains mostly unresolved. Hence, we performed GWAS on 18 FAAs from a 313-ecotype Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) association panel. Specifically, GWAS was performed on 98 traits derived from known amino acid metabolic pathways (approach 1) and then on 92 traits generated from an unbiased correlation-based metabolic network analysis (approach 2), and the results were compared. The latter approach facilitated the discovery of additional novel metabolic interactions and singlenucleotide polymorphism-trait associations not identified by the former approach. The most prominent network-guided GWAS signal was for a histidine (His)-related trait in a region containing two genes: a cationic amino acid transporter (CAT4) and a polynucleotide phosphorylase resistant to inhibition with fosmidomycin. A reverse genetics approach confirmed CAT4 to be responsible for the natural variation of His-related traits across the association panel. Given that His is a semiessential amino acid and a potent metal chelator, CAT4 orthologs could be considered as candidate genes for seed quality biofortification in crop plants.


Free amino acids (FAAs) play a pivotal role in the central metabolism of plants. FAAs serve as building blocks for protein synthesis and also are precursors for osmolytes, alternative energy, hormones, and key secondary metabolites (Rai, 2002; Araújo et al., 2010; Tzin and Galili, 2010; Angelovici et al., 2011). Studies of both developing and germinating seeds also have implicated FAAs in proper seed development and germination (Angelovici et al., 2010; Galili and Amir, 2013). Still, the

[^0]genetic control of FAA metabolism in seed remains poorly understood. One reason is that FAA metabolism is tightly intertwined with essential cellular processes in plants, and manipulating FAA levels can have strong deleterious, pleiotropic effects on the entire system (Guyer et al., 1995; Galili, 2011; Ingle, 2011; Pratelli and Pilot, 2014). For example, increasing Lys and Thr inhibits the activity of Asp kinase via a feedback inhibition loop (Clark and Lu, 2015). At high concentrations, this inhibition can lead to starvation of a downstream metabolic product, Met, which inhibits plant growth (Bright et al., 1982; Rognes et al., 1983; Heremans and Jacobs, 1995). In addition, several amino acid catabolic products, such as those emanating from branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) or Lys degradation pathways, can be channeled toward cellular energy production under both standard and stress growth conditions (Angelovici et al., 2009, 2011; Araújo et al., 2010; Peng et al., 2015).

Reconstructions of seed metabolic networks in several model species and tissues have offered important insights into these underlying metabolic interactions and regulation (Lu et al., 2008; Toubiana et al., 2013, 2015). For example, a correlation-based network metabolic


[^0]:    ${ }^{1}$ This work was supported by the U.S.-Israel Binational Agricultural Research and Development Fund (postdoctoral award no. ALTF 29-2011 to R.A.) and the National Science Foundation (grant no. 0922493 to D.D.).

    * Address correspondence to angelovicir@missouri.edu.

    The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the findings presented in this article in accordance with the policy described in the Instructions for Authors (www.plantphysiol.org) is: Ruthie Angelovici (angelovicir@missouri.edu).
    R.A. designed and performed the research and wrote the article; A.B. performed data analysis; N.D. performed research; S.G.-J. performed data analysis; M.A.G. designed research and performed data analysis; A.F. designed and performed data analysis; D.D. designed research and wrote the article.
    [OPEN] Articles can be viewed without a subscription.
    www.plantphysiol.org/cgi/doi/10.1104/pp.16.01287




---

nested association mapping panel facilitated the identification of a new cytochrome 450 gene involved in the pathway (Richter et al., 2016).

Here, we report and compare findings from GWAS performed on a broad range of biochemically based and network-derived FAA ratios calculated from a previous quantification of 18 FAAs in an Arabidopsis association panel (Angelovici et al., 2013). These metabolic ratios integrate both the extensive biochemical knowledge of amino acid pathways and the inherent coordinated behaviors of FAAs in seeds as deduced from a correlation-based network topology. This integrated approach uncovered novel metabolic clusters and the genes that regulate them. An in-depth molecular analysis of a significantly associated genomic region, pinpointed using this network-guided GWAS, facilitated the identification of a seed-specific His regulator not detected by GWAS either with the absolute levels of FAA in dry seeds or with calculated metabolic ratios based on biochemical affiliation. This study supports the potential of the network-guided GWAS approach to elucidate the genetic basis of a complex coordinated metabolic network, such as the FAA network.

## RESULTS

## Characterization of the Natural Variation of Free Amino Acids and Their Relationships in Dry Seeds

We previously performed a comprehensive analysis of 18 FAA levels quantified from three biological replicates of a 313 -accession Arabidopsis diversity panel (Angelovici et al., 2013; Supplemental Data Set S1). Across the diversity panel, Glu and Asp are the most abundant amino acids, and Met and His are the least abundant, with average relative compositions of $37 \%$, $20 \%, 0.63 \%$, and $0.96 \%$, respectively (Table I). Met and Ile vary the most across the panel (range greater than 4 -fold), and Thr, Trp, Lys, and Glu vary the least (range less than 2-fold; Table I). Broad-sense heritabilities of the absolute levels of FAAs are 0.5 to 0.8 for most amino acids except Thr and Trp, which are 0.11 and 0.24 , respectively (Table I). We performed a correlation-based network analysis to evaluate the relationships among the absolute levels of the 18 FAAs. Pairwise correlation coefficients among the 18 FAAs' back-transformed best linear unbiased predictors (BLUPs) were calculated using the Spearman's rank correlation method, and the results were visualized as a network of nodes and edges (Fig. 1; Supplemental Table S1). Each node in the network represents an amino acid, and each edge/line represents a correlation-based significant relationship between a pair of nodes ( $P<0.001, r_{\mathrm{sp}} \geq 0.6$ ). The network consists of 12 connected amino acids, and all correlation coefficients are positive. Interestingly, the connectivity of Glu is relatively low despite its abundance. Ala, Phe, and Tyr also have low connectivity. Asp, Thr, Met, Gly, Pro, and Trp are disconnected from the network. The network topology also indicates two highly interconnected groups. Group 1 includes the BCAA family (i.e. Ile, Leu, and Val; Fig. 1), which is consistent with previous studies ( Binder, 2010; Angelovici et al., 2013). Group 2 is novel and includes six amino acids from four amino acid families: Ser, Gln, Arg and His, Val, and Lys (Fig. 1). Val has the highest number of connections (nodal degree) and the highest hub score, followed by His, Ser, and Lys, indicating its centrality to the network (Supplemental Table S1B).

## Approach 1: GWAS of Absolute and Relative FAA Levels and Ratios Based on a Priori Biochemical Knowledge

To uncover potential regulators of FAAs in seeds, we calculated 98 traits (Supplemental Table S2) using known metabolic pathways and biochemical interactions among the 18 FAAs. The traits fall into four categories: (1) the absolute levels of the quantified FAAs (in $\mathrm{nmol} \mathrm{mg}^{-1}$ dry seeds); (2) the sum of amino acids that constitute a biochemical family (e.g. the sum of all FAAs that belong to the Asp family: Asp, Thr, Ile, and Met); (3) the relative composition (i.e. each amino acid as a percentage of the total FAA quantified; e.g. Ile/ total); and (4) the ratios based on the amino acid biosynthetic and degradative pathways and known interactions among their enzymes, such as competition between pathways and feedback loops. Category 4 ratios include a single FAA divided by the sum of its biochemical family (e.g. Lys/Asp family), ratios of FAAs from competing metabolic branches (e.g. Thr/Met; Galili, 1995), and ratios of FAAs that can serve as precursors to downstream products (e.g. Glu/Gln). The full list of these biochemically based traits is presented in Supplemental Table S2. Hereafter, we use the one-letter code annotation of the amino acids to describe the FAA traits; a string of one-letter codes describes the sum of FAAs (e.g. ILV is the sum of Ile, Leu, and Val).

We conducted a GWAS on all 98 traits using the methodology described by Angelovici et al. (2013). Consistent with this previous study, we found several BCAA-related traits to have significant associations, including with BCAT2 (At1G10070; Supplemental Data Set S2). However, beyond those already reported (Angelovici et al., 2013), no major, novel GWAS signals were discovered from this elaborated analysis of all BCAA-related traits ( 21 traits in total, including all traits with BCAAs in the denominator; Supplemental Table S2). Therefore, these BCAA-related traits will not be addressed further here and instead will be referenced in subsequent sections for comparative purposes only. GWAS on the remaining 77 non-BCAA-related FAA traits produced only one significant singlenucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-trait association at the $5 \%$ false discovery rate (FDR) level. We found SNP184159 to be significantly associated with the sum of Gly and Ser absolute levels (GS), which, notably, are two of the three members of the Ser family (Ser, Cys, and Gly; Table II, region 1; Supplemental Data Set S2; Supplemental Fig. S1). SNP184159 is located on chromosome 5 at position $12,282,814 \mathrm{bp}$ within At5G32623,




---

Table I. Mean, relative composition, mean range, and broad sense heritability of 18 FAA absolute levels in dry seeds

| Trait | Back-Transformed BLUPs |  |  |  |  |  | Mean Range |  | Broad Sense Heritability |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
|  | Mean | SE |  | Relative Composition |  | SE | Minimum | Maximum |  |
| Met | 0.08 | 0.001 | 0.63 | 0.01 | 0.04 | 0.18 | 0.80 | 0.02 |  |
| His | 0.13 | 0.001 | 0.96 | 0.01 | 0.08 | 0.26 | 0.60 | 0.04 |  |
| Ile | 0.15 | 0.002 | 1.17 | 0.01 | 0.07 | 0.33 | 0.76 | 0.02 |  |
| Leu | 0.16 | 0.002 | 1.23 | 0.01 | 0.10 | 0.27 | 0.66 | 0.03 |  |
| Gln | 0.18 | 0.002 | 1.41 | 0.01 | 0.12 | 0.31 | 0.49 | 0.05 |  |
| Tyr | 0.19 | 0.001 | 1.43 | 0.01 | 0.13 | 0.28 | 0.53 | 0.04 |  |
| Pro | 0.22 | 0.002 | 1.66 | 0.02 | 0.13 | 0.41 | 0.54 | 0.04 |  |
| Lys | 0.24 | 0.001 | 1.81 | 0.01 | 0.18 | 0.34 | 0.56 | 0.04 |  |
| Val | 0.37 | 0.003 | 2.83 | 0.02 | 0.21 | 0.63 | 0.71 | 0.03 |  |
| Phe | 0.39 | 0.004 | 2.98 | 0.02 | 0.24 | 0.64 | 0.71 | 0.03 |  |
| Gly | 0.43 | 0.004 | 3.31 | 0.02 | 0.26 | 0.71 | 0.43 | 0.05 |  |
| Thr | 0.51 | 0.001 | 3.85 | 0.03 | 0.43 | 0.58 | 0.11 | 0.09 |  |
| Arg | 0.57 | 0.005 | 4.38 | 0.03 | 0.40 | 1.02 | 0.53 | 0.05 |  |
| Ala | 0.62 | 0.006 | 4.78 | 0.04 | 0.43 | 1.13 | 0.60 | 0.04 |  |
| Ser | 0.71 | 0.006 | 5.44 | 0.04 | 0.47 | 1.10 | 0.64 | 0.03 |  |
| Trp | 0.72 | 0.003 | 5.58 | 0.04 | 0.56 | 0.89 | 0.24 | 0.06 |  |
| Asp | 2.61 | 0.029 | 19.93 | 0.18 | 1.58 | 5.16 | 0.77 | 0.02 |  |
| Glu | 4.76 | 0.030 | 36.63 | 0.13 | 3.51 | 6.55 | 0.64 | 0.03 |  |

which is annotated as a pseudogene/transposon. An estimation of pairwise linkage disequilibrium (LD) between SNP184159 and SNPs located in the surrounding $620-\mathrm{kb}$ genomic region found moderately strong LD $\left(r^{2}=0.518\right)$ with an SNP at position $12,277,752 \mathrm{bp}$ (SNP184146). This nearly $5-\mathrm{kb}$ upstream SNP is located in a gene annotated as DEFENSIN-LIKE (DEFL family protein; At5G32619), the closest functional gene (located 4,723 bp upstream) to SNP184159 (Supplemental Fig. S1).

## Approach 2: Network-Guided GWAS of Seed FAAs

The assessment of metabolic ratios based only on current biochemical knowledge yielded few new insights and is likely constrained by our limited understanding of FAA pathways and their interactions. Because the GWAS of the 77 non-BCAA-related FAA traits yielded only one new association (for the GS trait), we evaluated the use of an unbiased approach based on a correlation network topology for trait determination. The method is based on the assumption that FAA correlations across the association panel are driven, in part, by genetics. Hence, while conceptually similar to approach 1 , the metabolic ratios generated via a network topology are based on metabolic cluster affiliation rather than on biochemical family affiliation. We calculated traits as a ratio of connected metabolic pairs or as a ratio of a single amino acid to its fully or partially connected metabolic group. Thirteen such groups were so defined (Supplemental Table S3), with most being partial versions of the two highly correlated groups (group 1 or group 2) or the entire network (Fig. 1; Supplemental Table S3). A total of 92 traits were derived using this approach (Supplemental Table S3), several of which overlap with the traits determined using approach 1 (marked with asterisks in Supplemental Table S3). As with approach 1, no major novel genomic regions were detected among the 31 BCAA-related network-derived traits, and these traits will be addressed separately in a comparison of the two approaches. GWAS performed on the remaining 61 network-derived traits produced three unique genomic regions with significant associations at the $5 \%$ FDR level for five FAA-related ratios (Table II; Supplemental Data Set S3): four ratios are His-related traits, and one ratio is a Ser-related trait (Table II). Two of the three identified genomic regions have highly significant GWAS signals. A genomic region on chromosome 5 is strongly associated with the S/LIVKHSQR trait (Table II), while a second region on chromosome 3 is strongly associated with four His-related traits (Table II). The latter region has significant SNP-trait associations spanning 29 kb (positions 912,617-941,537 bp; Supplemental Data Set S3).

Four SNPs on chromosome 5 are significantly associated with the S/LIVKHSQR trait (Table II; Fig. 2). Three of these SNPs (i.e. SNP212610, SNP212533, and SNP212501) have similar raw $P$ values and FDR-corrected $P$ values of $2.43 \mathrm{E}-02$ to $3.92 \mathrm{E}-02$ (Fig. 2C; Supplemental Data Set S3) and explain $9.4 \%, 8.7 \%$, and $8.3 \%$, respectively, of the total phenotypic variation. The three SNPs are located relatively far from each other (at positions $26,289,644,26,258,036$, and $26,246,837 \mathrm{bp}$, respectively) and show weak LD with each other ( $r^{2}<$ 0.26; Supplemental Fig. S2). All three SNPs also demonstrate weak LD with SNPs within any of their surrounding genes in a $200-\mathrm{kb}$ region $\left(r^{2}<0.23\right.$; Supplemental Fig. S2). However, no SNPs were called within a gene located $6,609 \


---



Figure 1. Correlation-based network of seed FAA relationships across the Arabidopsis diversity panel. The Spearman's rank correlation matrix was calculated from the back-transformed BLUPs of the absolute levels. The nodes represent FAA levels, and the edges represent correlations between the different FAA levels. Network edge parameters are $r_{\mathrm{sp}} \geq 0.6$ and $P \leq 0.001$. The node color denotes the amino acid family (red, shikimic acid; orange, Ser; green, pyruvate and BCAA; blue, Glu; dark blue, Asp); node size reflects nodal degree; and edge width reflects the strength of the correlation. The Spearman's rank correlation coefficient is represented near each edge. The two highly connected groups are circled in blue and red. Free His is included within the red-circled group together with Ser, Gln, Lys, Arg, and Val.
amino acid biosynthetic gene responsible for the conversion of Cys to Ala. Because Ser is the precursor of Cys, this gene would seem a leading candidate as a regulator, except that, as with many amino acid biosynthetic genes that are not redundant, its knockout is lethal (Frazzon et al., 2007). We also detected two of the three most significant SNPs for the S/LIVKQHSR trait (i.e. SNP212501 and SNP212610) among the top 20 SNPs of the $S /$ total GWAS (SNPs 2 and 16, respectively; Supplemental Table S4), suggesting that the networkguided approach increased our ability to identify significant candidate genes. The four His-related traits are H/KHR, H/KHSQR, H/KHSQRV, and H/LIVKHSQR, and the top three associated SNPs for these traits are SNP82066, SNP82058, and SNP82067, respectively, on chromosome 3 (Figs. 3 and 4; Table II; Supplemental Data Set S3). These three SNPs explain $9 \%$ to $11 \%$ of the total phenotypic variation for the four His-related traits (Supplemental Data Set S3). SNP82058 is located in a gene annotated as a polyribonucleotide nucleotidyltransferase (RESISTANT TO INHIBITION WITH FSM [RIF10]; At3G03710; Fig. 4B). SNP82066 is located in an intragenic region upstream of RIF10 and downstream of a gene annotated as CATIONIC AMINO ACID TRANSPORTER4 (CAT4; At3G03720; Fig. 4B), and SNP82067 is located within CAT4. In total, all the significant SNPs across all four traits span a 28,920-bp region that contains nine open reading frames (Fig. 4B). Pairwise LD estimates for the $6100-\mathrm{kb}$ region centered on the most significant SNP (i.e. SNP82058) indicate strong LD among all these SNPs and patterns of longrange LD in the region, which may account for the multiple significant associations (Supplemental Fig. S3).
Interestingly, SNP82066, SNP82058, and SNP82067 are significantly associated with the four His networkderived traits but not with any His-related traits determined by approach 1 , such as $\mathrm{H} /$ total or $\mathrm{H} /$ EHPRG (Glu family). Nevertheless, these SNPs are among the top three SNPs with the lowest $P$ values for $\mathrm{H} / \mathrm{EHPRG}$ and among the fifth and sixth lowest $P$ values for $\mathrm{H} /$ total (Fig. 3, E and F; Supplemental Table S4). Beyond chromosome 3, H/LIVKHSQR is the only trait with an additional significant SNP-trait association, which occurs for SNP32041 at position 19,661,134 bp on chromosome 1 (Fig. 3D; Table II; Supplemental Data Set S3). This SNP is located in a gene with unknown function (At1G52780), although, the PANTHER classification system (http://www.pantherdb.org/panther/family.do? clsAccession=PTHR19241) records this gene as an ATPbinding cassette transporter.

## Comparison between GWAS of BCAA-Related Traits Derived from Approaches 1 and 2

GWAS of BCAA traits had previously characterized BCAT2 as an important gene for determining BCAArelated traits in seeds. Our GWAS results from the BCAA-related traits derived using both approaches 1 and 2 are consistent with this previous study (Supplemental Data Sets S2 and S3; Supplemental Table S5). Nevertheless, among all the BCAA-related traits analyzed, the network-derived trait I/LIVKHSQR has a slightly elevated significant association ( $P$ value of 4.02E-08) with the previously characterized tagging SNP5373 on chromosome 1, whose strongest association from approach 1 is 5.27E-07 for the I/total trait. SNP5373 explains $22 \%$ of the phenotypic variation of the I/LIVKHSQR trait compared with $19 \%$ of the I/ total trait (Supplemental Data Sets S2 and S3). More pronounced observations were obtained using linkage analysis of dry seed FAAs from a Bayreuth-0 (Bay) $\times$ Shahdara (Sha) RIL population (Loudet et al., 2002; Angelovici et al., 2013). This mapping population contains significantly different haplotype pairs for the significantly associated genomic region identified in GWAS of BCAA on chromosome 1 (Angelovici et al., 2013) and was used previously to independently confirm a GWAS association. A linkage analysis of the same data using the network-derived BCAA traits (I, L, or V)/LIVKHSQR and (I, L, or V)/LIVKHSQRYEFA was performed and compared with the previous linkage analysis (Table III). We again found that the large-effect QTL on chromosome




---

Table II. Summary of GWAS results for a genomic region that contains significant associations at the 5\% FDR level identified by approach 1 and three genomic regions that contain significant associations at the $5 \%$ FDR level identified by approach 2
NA, Not applicable.

| Region | Identifier | Maximal <br> Chromosomal <br> Range for Locus | Trait | No. of <br> Significant SNPs <br> in the Region | Most <br> Significant <br> SNP | $P$ Value <br> of the Most <br> Significant SNP after <br> FDR Correction | Gene | Gene <br> Annotation |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| Summary of significant associations determined/calculated by approach 1 (not including BCAA traits) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 1 | Chromosome | 5, 12,282,814 | GS | 1 | 184,159 | 4.32E-02 | At5G32619 | Pseudogene |
| Summary of significant associations determined/calculated by approach 2 (not including BCAA traits) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| 2 | Chromosome | 1, 19,661,134 | H/LIVKHSQR | 1 | 32,041 | 4.97E-02 | At1G52780 | Protein of unknown <br> function (DUF2921) |
| 3 | Chromosome | 3, 912,617-941,537 | H/KHSQR | 18 | 82,058 | 9.24E-04 | At3G03710 | Polyribonucleotide <br> nucleotidyltransferase, <br> putative |
|  |  |  | H/KHSQRV | 13 | 82,067 | 1.26E-03 | At3G03710 | Polyribonucleotide <br> nucleotidyltransferase, <br> putative |
|  |  |  | H/LIVKHSQR | 12 | 82,067 | 3.47E-03 | At3G03710 | Polyribonucleotide <br> nucleotidyltransferase, <br> putative |
|  |  |  | H/KHR | 10 | 82,066 | 2.35E-02 | NA |  |
| 4 | Chromosome | 5, 26,246,837-26,289,644 | S/LIVKHSQR | 4 | 212,610 | 2.39E-02 | NA |  |

1 detected using approach 1 shows a substantial increase in significance for the I/LIVKHSQR and I/ LIVKHSQRYEFA network-derived traits (18.46 and 22.57 log of odds [LOD] scores, respectively) and explains more of the total phenotypic variation $\left(r^{2}=\right.$ $41.8 \%$ and $48.4 \%$, respectively). The strongest effect QTL from the previous BCAA-related trait linkage analysis yielded LOD scores that range from 6.06 to 9.3 and explain $16.7 \%$ to $25.55 \%$ of the total phenotypic variation (Table III; Angelovici et al., 2013).
Multiple-Locus Mixed Model and Haplotype Analysis of the Significant His-Related SNP-Trait Associations
We chose the strong GWAS signal from the Hisrelated traits for further dissection and validation. To resolve the complex signal on chromosome 3 , we performed a multiple-locus mixed model (MLMM) approach that uses stepwise selection (Segura et al., 2012) in the vicinity of the most significant SNPs for each trait. All SNPs with a minor allele frequency greater than or equal to 0.05 in a $6100-\mathrm{kb}$ region were considered for inclusion in the final model (Supplemental Table S5). The optimal models contain only one SNP for each trait tested: SNP82058 for the H/KHSQR trait, SNP 82066 for the H/KHR trait, and SNP 82067 for the H/LIVKHSQR and H/KHSQRV traits (Fig. 4; Supplemental Table S6). To validate the results, we reran the GWAS using a unified mixed model that included the respective optimal SNP as a covariate for each trait. No significant associations were detected for any traits with either SNP (Supplemental Fig. S4), including the additional SNP-trait association detected on chromosome 1 for the H/LIVKHSQR trait (Fig. 3D; Table II). A haplotype analysis of the region spanning all the significant SNPs on chromosome 3 (i.e. 912,617941,537 bp; Table II; Supplemental Data Set S3) identified



Figure 2. GWAS summary of S/LIVKHSQR. A and B, Scatterplots of the association results from a unified mixed model analysis of S/LIVKHSQR (A) and S/total (B) traits across the five Arabidopsis chromosomes. The negative $\log _{10}$-transformed $P$ values from the GWAS analysis are plotted against the genomic physical positions. $P$ values for SNPs that are statistically significant for a trait at 5\% FDR are in red. The red box represents the corresponding chromosomal region of this significant signal in the S/total Manhattan plot. C, Graphical representation of the genes within the vicinity of SNP212501, SNP212533, and SNP212610. Genes are represented by black boxes, and a pseudogene is represented by the white box. At5G65720 encodes a Cys desulfurase (NFS1) that is the leading candidate gene for S/LIVKHSQR.




---



Figure 3. GWAS for the His-related traits from the two approaches. Scatterplots show the association results from a unified mixed model analysis for H/KHR (A), H/KHSQR (B), H/KHSQRV (C), H/LIVKHQSR (D), H/EHPRG (Glu family; E), and H/total (F) traits across the five Arabidopsis chromosomes. The negative $\log _{10}$-transformed $P$ values from the GWAS analysis are plotted against the genomic physical position. $P$ values for SNPs that are statistically significant for a trait at $5 \%$ FDR are in red. Traits A through D share a similar significant GWAS signal on chromosome 3. Red boxes represent the corresponding chromosomal region of this signal for traits $E$ and $F$.
five haploblocks (Supplemental Table S7), and the four most significant SNPs trace back to haploblock 3 (chromosome 3, 919,927-929,830 bp). Haploblock 3 ( 9.903 kb ; Fig. 4B) spans a large portion of both the RIF10 (919,542-925,338 bp) and CAT4 (925,612$930,974 \mathrm{bp}$ ) genes and contains 16 SNPs: nine in RIF10, six in CAT4, and one between the two genes. When unified mixed linear models were fitted, the most significant contrasting haplotype pair found for haploblock 3 was ACAAGTCACGATGTTA versus ATTCATCTAAGTGCAT, with frequencies of 0.262 and 0.099 , respectively (Supplemental Fig. S5A). These haplotypes represent the low and high levels, respectively, of the His-derived traits (Supplemental Fig. S5B). Although the differences in the phenotype averages between the ecotype groups harboring the two haplotypes are small ( $7 \%-9 \%$ ), they are highly significant ( $P$ values of $1.2 \mathrm{E}-05-$ 2.38E-07; Supplemental Fig. S5B).

## Functional Characterization of CAT4 and RIF10

To further test whether CAT4 or RIF10 is a regulator/ effector of the His-related traits, we used quantitative reverse transcription (RT)-PCR to determine the transcription levels of each gene at four different stages of seed development in the Columbia-0 (Col-0) background: early maturation (12 d after flowering [DAF]), midmaturation (15 DAF), late maturation (18 DAF), and complete desiccation (dry seeds; Supplemental Fig. S6A). We found that CAT4 transcription levels increase toward midmaturation and decrease moderately during desiccation and that RIF10 transcript levels are low and constant throughout maturation and desiccation. According to the Arabidopsis eFP Browser (http://bbc. botany.utoronto.ca/efp/cgi-bin/efpWeb.cgibin/efpWeb. cgi; Winter et al., 2007), CAT4 expression levels are relatively high in dry seeds compared with vegetative tissues, and RIF10 is highly expressed in the vegetative tissue and decreases greatly during seed development (Supplemental Fig. S6, B and C).



Figure 4. GWAS of H/KHSQR. A, Scatterplot of the association results from a unified mixed model analysis of H/KHSQR on chromosome 3 only. The negative $\log _{10}$-transformed $P$ values from the GWAS analysis are plotted against the genomic physical position. $P$ values for SNPs that are statistically significant for a trait at $5 \%$ FDR are in red. $B$, Graphical representation of genes and haploblocks within the genomic region spanning SNPs that have significant associations for H/KHSQR. Genes are represented by black boxes, and a pseudogene is represented by the white box. C, Haploblocks are represented by gray boxes. Haploblock 3 (shown in red) contains the four most significant SNPs for the GWASassisted His-related traits.




---

Table III. QTL analysis of the network-guided BCAA traits from the Bay $\times$ Sha mapping population
Only QTLs that overlap the approximately 6- to 12-centimorgan (cM) chromosome 1 interval previously detected by GWAS are shown. Parameters were obtained from the Plant Breeding and Biology Quantitative Trait Loci (PLABQTL) software program using phenotypic and genotypic data from 158 RILs. Asterisks represent the most significant QTLs described by Angelovici et al. (2013); all traits are represented in one letter code.

| Trait | Chromosome | Position <br> cM | Supporting Interval |  | LOD | High Parent | r ${ }^{2}$ <br> $\%$ | Allelic Effect Estimates |
| :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| I/LIVKHSQR | 1 | 8 | 6 | 12 | 18.46 | Sha | 41.8 | ${ }^{2] 0.52}$ |
| I/LIVKHSQRYEFA | 1 | 10 | 6 | 12 | 22.57 | Sha | 48.4 | ${ }^{\boxtimes}-0.186$ |
| L/LIVKHSQR | 1 | 8 | 4 | 12 | 6.06 | Sha | 16.4 | $\square^{2}-0.321$ |
| L/ LIVKHSQRYEFA | 1 | 8 | 6 | 12 | 10.89 | Sha | 27.8 | 2-0.16 |
| I/IVL* | 1 | 8 | 6 | 12 | 9.3 | Sha | 23.9 | 2 -0.011 |
| L/total* | 1 | 8 | 6 | 14 | 9.91 | Sha | 25.5 | ${ }^{\ominus}-0.119$ |
| I | 1 | 8 | 4 | 14 | 6.06 | Sha | 16.7 | ${ }^{2]-0.021}$ |

Based on results from the expression analysis and on its annotation as a cationic amino acid transporter, CAT4 seemed the most likely candidate gene responsible for the natural variation in the His-related traits. Hence, we employed a transgenic strategy to test the effect of the null or knockdown mutants of both CAT4 and RIF10 on the FAA content of dry seeds. Since T-DNA insertion lines for CAT4 were not available, we used an RNA interference (RNAi) approach to knock down the gene. We transformed the Agrikola construct CATMAa02630 into the Col-0 background and used an empty vector with similar antibiotic resistance as a control. We recovered three homozygous lines with reductions of more than $70 \%$ at the mRNA level (Supplemental Fig. S7A) and then performed dry seed and leaf FAA quantification analyses on these lines (Fig. 5). The results show a seed-specific significant increase in absolute levels of His in all three independent RNAi lines (Fig. 5; Supplemental Data Set S4); the seedspecific increases in His absolute levels ranged from 4 - to 6 -fold (Fig. 5A), and a 2.5- to 4.5-fold increase in the His-relative ratios is significantly associated with this region (Fig. 5C). Interestingly, Lys levels have small but significantly increased levels in all three RNAi lines (fold increase, $1.4-2$; $P$ value, $0.03-0.00015$; Fig. 5). We isolated and characterized the rif10 alleles of the homozygous T-DNA insertion lines from the SALK T-DNA collection (SALK_013306 and SALK_037353); one allele (SALK_013306) has a severe growth phenotype and therefore was excluded from the analysis. RT-PCR using primers that flank the T-DNA insertion of rif10 was used to confirm that the line lacks the transcripts
(Supplemental Fig. S7B). An FAA quantification analysis of the dry seeds from rif10 showed small but significant effects on the absolute levels of Gln, Asp, Phe, and Trp but not on His or any His-related ratios (Fig. 5, A and C). Taken together, these results confirm that CAT4 significantly affects the absolute and relative levels of His and is the gene responsible for the natural variation.

## DISCUSSION

Previous metabolic QTL mapping and GWAS on both primary and secondary metabolite profiles have demonstrated that analyses of metabolic ratios based on known biochemical interactions yield stronger associations than GWAS performed on the corresponding metabolites' absolute levels (Wentzell et al., 2007; Vallabhaneni and Wurtzel, 2009; Wurtzel et al., 2012; Angelovici et al., 2013; Gonzalez-Jorge et al., 2013; Lipka et al., 2013; Owens et al., 2014). Our study demonstrates that a network-guided metabolite-basedGWAS performed on unbiased ratios derived from a correlation-based network topology improves the selection of traits for downstream GWAS and can facilitate further identification of significant associations among genomic regions that affect the natural variation of a tight, interconnected FAA metabolic network, such as amino acids (Table II; Supplemental Table S5). Our approach utilizes the metabomelic network analysis differently than previous network-assisted GWAS. For example, previous studies mainly used gene coexpression networks to either prioritize candidate genes retrieved from GWAS performed on absolute metabolite levels (Chan et al., 2011; Lee et al., 2011; Greene et al., 2015; Matsuda et al., 2015) or to identify unknown metabolites from combined metabolites and gene coexpression networks (Krumsiek et al., 2012). To date, interconnected metabolic traits have been analyzed using multivariate GWAS, factor analysis, or principal component analysisbased GWAS (Shen et al., 2013; Brachi et al., 2015). Our approach, which relies instead on single amino acids to a single or a group of amino acids derived from the network topology, may yield results whose biological relevance is comparatively clearer. The correlation-based network of the seed FAAs facilitated the visualization of both characterized and uncharacterized metabolic interactions (Fig. 1). The genetics that underlie the strong correlation of group 1 (composed of all the BCAAs) is most likely due to the four shared biosynthetic enzymes and one shared catabolic gene, BCAT2, that is associated with the natural variation of BCAA levels in seeds (Binder et al., 2007; Binder, 2010; Angelovici et al., 2013). A second metabolic cluster (group 2; Fig. 1), consisting of FAAs from four amino acid families, is an uncharacterized metabolic module. Interestingly, Val is the central hub that connects the two parts of the network (Fig. 1).

This network is consistent with previous studies showing that perturbations in BCAA pathway genes induce multiple changes of amino acid levels in a




---



Figure 5. Seed and leaf FAA-related traits measured from three cat4 RNAi lines and rif10. Absolute FAA levels were measured from dry seeds $(A)$ and leaves $(B)$ harvested from 2-week-old plants. Significant ratios were calculated from both dry seeds $(C)$ and leaves $(D)$. Values represent fold changes in FAA for the three CAT4 RNAi lines (gray, black, and striped bars) and rif10 (white bars; seeds only) relative to their respective controls (wild type [WT] with an empty vector). Averages and $S E$ values were calculated from four measurements. *, FAA traits that have a significant difference ( $P<0.05$, Student's $t$ test) between the wild type and rif10; ${ }^{* * *}$, FAA traits that have a significant difference ( $P<0.05$, Student's $t$ test) between the wild type and all three CAT4 RNAi lines. For the FAA content, see Supplemental Data Set S4.
seed-specific manner (Gu et al., 2010; Angelovici et al., 2013). The network-guided metabolite-based-GWAS we performed on the FAAs of dry Arabidopsis seed identified two significantly associated genomic regions (Table II, regions 3 and 4) that could not have been detected otherwise. One region is significantly associated with a Ser-related trait (S/LIVKHSQR), while the other region is significantly associated with four His-related traits (H/KHR, KHSQR, KHSQRV, and LIVKHSQR; Table II; Figs. 2-4; Supplemental Data Sets S2 and S3). Interestingly, the most significant SNPs ( $P<0.05$ after FDR correction) detected for these five traits are among the top 20 SNPs with the lowest $P$ value for the corresponding traits generated using approach 1: that is, S/ total, H/total, and H/EHPRG (representing the H/Glu family; Table II; Supplemental Table S4). Nevertheless, the $P$ values (after FDR correction) for these traits are not significant and range from 0.28 to 0.97 . These results suggest that the network-guided GWAS increased the power of our analysis. It is arguable that an SNP ranking approach may have extracted the same candidate genes; however, when testing nearly 100 traits (as with approach 1), that approach could yield hundreds of candidate genes and, therefore, might not be as useful at prioritizing candidate genes for validation.
The linkage analysis of the unique network of BCAAre lated traits performed on dry seed FAAs measured from the Bay $\times$ Sha mapping population (Loudet et al., 2002; Angelovici et al., 2013) further supports the increase in our analysis power. A previous linkage analysis of the free BCAA-related traits in this population identified a large-effect QTL on chromosome 1 (containing the quantitative trait gene BCAT2) for L/total, I/IVL, and I with LOD scores of 9.91, 9.3, and 6.06, respectively, that explained $25.5 \%, 23.9 \%$, and $16.7 \%$ of the total phenotypic variation, respectively (Table III; Angelovici et al., 2013). In contrast, linkage analysis of this FAA data set with the unique network-guided




---

Wong HK, Chan HK, Coruzzi GM, Lam HM (2004) Correlation of ASN2 gene expression with ammonium metabolism in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 134: 332-338
Wurtzel ET, Cuttriss A, Vallabhaneni R (2012) Maize provitamin A carotenoids, current resources, and future metabolic engineering challenges. Front Plant Sci 3: 29
Yan J, Kandianis CB, Harjes CE, Bai L, Kim EH, Yang X, Skinner DJ, Fu Z, Mitchell S, Li Q, et al (2010) Rare genetic variation at Zea mays crtRB1 increases beta-carotene in maize grain. Nat Genet 42: 322-327
Yan N, Doelling JH, Falbel TG, Durski AM, Vierstra RD (2000) The ubiquitin-specific protease family from Arabidopsis: AtUBP1 and 2 are required for the resistance to the amino acid analog canavanine. Plant Physiol 124: 1828-1843
Yang H, Krebs M, Stierhof YD, Ludewig U (2014a) Characterization of the putative amino acid transporter genes AtCAT2, 3 \& 4: the tonoplast localized AtCAT2 regulates soluble leaf amino acids. J Plant Physiol 171: 594-601
Yang H, Postel S, Kemmerling B, Ludewig U (2014b) Altered growth and improved resistance of Arabidopsis against Pseudomonas syringae by overexpression of the basic amino acid transporter AtCAT1. Plant Cell Environ 37: 1404-1414
Yang H, Stierhof YD, Ludewig U (2015) The putative Cationic Amino Acid Transporter 9 is targeted to vesicles and may be involved in plant amino acid homeostasis. Front Plant Sci 6: 212
Yu J, Buckler ES (2006) Genetic association mapping and genome organization of maize. Curr Opin Biotechnol 17: 155-160




---

