grams), and so the precipitating factor is uncertain. This patient received another cycle of amonaﬁde without complication.  

The other cardiac event occurred after cycle 5 of amonaﬁdein a patient with no previous cardiac history. The patient developed hypotension. The electro car diogram revealed new T wave inversions in all leads. The nuclear ejection fraction was normal at   $74\%$   and the cardiac enzymes were normal. The echo cardiogram revealed a very small pericardia l effusion, an atrial septal aneurysm and normal wall motion. The patient received no further treatment with amonaﬁde. As there was no other obvious precipitating factor, this event may have been drug-related.  

Headache occurred in   $20\%$   (6 patients) of those entered: grade I or II (mild to moderate and transient) in 5 patients and as grade III (severe and unrelenting) in the sixth patient. The grade I/II headaches were generally brief and relieved with analgesics, however, one patient did have grade II headaches intermittently for one month following treatment. The one patient with a grade III headache developed it just prior to administration of the ﬁfth dose in cycle 5. The headache lasted 5 days. A head CT revealed only mastoid it is. No further chemotherapy was given as the patient progressed and developed cardiac toxicity as described above.  

Only one patient developed grade III nausea. Stomatitis occurred in only one patient during a period of grade IV leukopenia and thr ombo cyto peni a.  

Transient elevation of liver function tests occurred in 9 patients and consisted mostly of mild trans a minas e elevations. One patient developed grade II transaminase elevations transient ly 2 weeks after therapy and then a brief grade IV elevation of bilirubin one month after treatment. Sonogram of the liver revealed only fatty changes.  

Using caffeine as a substrate, it has previously been demonstrated that the ratio of urinary concentration of two metabolites of caffeine 5-acetyl amino-6-amino-3- methyl uracil (AAMU) and 1-methyl xanthine (1X) is a useful disc rim in at or of acetylator phenotype [14].  

Acetylator phe no typing was available in 21 of the 30 patients on the study. AAMU/1X ratios ranged from 0.03 to 11.6 with a median of 1.31 and a 75th percentile of 1.76. A molar ratio of AAMU/1X of 1.8 was used to distinguish fast and slow acetyl at or s [16] (see Fig. 2). By this criterion, 4 of the 21 patients (  $\it{.19\%}$  ,  $90\%$   conﬁdence interval  $7\%–38\%$  ) were characterized as fast acetyl at or s. Leukocyte nadirs were available for 18/21 patients for whom acetylator phe no typing was available, including 15 of the 17 slow acetyl at or s and 3 of the 4 fast acetyl at or s. In contrast to previous reports [12,15], there was no signiﬁcant difference in the degree of leukocyte toxicity,   $\mathrm{(p=0.84)}$   (see Fig. 3). The fast acetyl at or s contributed to one of the grade I toxicities and two of the grade II toxicities. The slow acetyl at or s accounted for 1 grade I, 3 grade II and 4 grade IV toxicities. The absolute numbers of the grade I and II toxicities were nearly identical for the slow and fast acetyl at or s, but all of the very toxic events occurred in slow acetyl at or s. The two most severely affected patients with grade IV leukopenia and grade  $\mathrm{II}$   or III thr ombo cyto peni a were in fact the slowest acetyl at or s in the group. The patient who tolerated the highest dose escalation, however (  $10\%$   per cycle for 4 cycles), was a slow acetylator.  

There was no association of the nadir leukocyte count with sex   $\mathtt{(p=0.45)}$   or race   $\mathrm{(p=0.77)}$  . There was no association between the logarithm of either the pre treatment leukocyte count or the nadir leukocyte count and acetylator phenotype, race or sex. Upon further analysis, it was noted that patients at or above the median age of 59 years had a lower nadir leukocyte count than those younger than age 59   $2.0/\mathrm{mm}^{3}$    vs  $7.1/\mathrm{mm}^{3}$  ,  ${\tt p}=0.05$  ).  

There were no factors identiﬁed which were associated with the logarithm of nadir absolute neutrophil count. However, this ﬁnding is based on available data from only 15 patients. There was a suggestion of there being lower nadir absolute neutrophil counts for non-whites than those of whites, although this did not achieve statistical sign i can ce.  