Table 2. Seeded species presence as a percent of the 48 total treatment plots at Bass River Recreation Area, Ottawa County, MI, US. Species are ordered in terms of presence during 2011. Column C corresponds to the coefficient of conservatism for each species specific to Michigan (MDNR 2001).
\begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|c|}
\hline Family & Species & Common Name & C & 2011 \\
\hline Poaceae & Andropogon gerardii & Big Bluestem & 5 & \(100.0 \%\) \\
\hline Poaceae & Schizachyrium scoparium & Little Bluestem & 5 & \(100.0 \%\) \\
\hline Poaceae & Sorghastrum nutans & Indiangrass & 6 & \(100.0 \%\) \\
\hline Lamiaceae & Monarda fistulosa & Wild Bergamot & 2 & \(97.9 \%\) \\
\hline Asteraceae & Coreopsis lanceolata & Lanceleaf Tickseed & 8 & \(93.8 \%\) \\
\hline Lamiaceae & Monarda punctata & Spotted Beebalm & 4 & \(87.5 \%\) \\
\hline Asteraceae & Rudbeckia hirta & Blackeyed Susan & 1 & \(83.3 \%\) \\
\hline Apocynaceae & Asclepias tuberosa & Butterfly Milkweed & 5 & \(77.1 \%\) \\
\hline Poaceae & Elymus canadensis & Canada Wildrye & 4 & \(43.8 \%\) \\
\hline Asteraceae & Ratibida pinnata & Pinnate Prairie Confelrower & 4 & \(39.6 \%\) \\
\hline Asteraceae & Pseudognaphalium helleri & Heller's Cudweed & 2 & \(12.5 \%\) \\
\hline Fabaceae & Lupinus perennis & Sundial Lupine & 7 & \(12.5 \%\) \\
\hline Poaceae & Panicum virgatum & Switchgrass & 4 & \(12.5 \%\) \\
\hline Asteraceae & Solidago nemoralis & Gray Goldenrod & 2 & \(10.4 \%\) \\
\hline Asteraceae & Coreopsis tripteris & Tall Tickseed & 7 & \(8.3 \%\) \\
\hline Fabaceae & Lespedeza capitata & Roundhead Lespedeza & 5 & \(6.3 \%\) \\
\hline Verbenaceae & Verbena stricta & Hoory Verbena & 4 & \(2.1 \%\) \\
\hline Asteraceae & Coreopsis palmata & Stiff Tickseed & 10 & \(2.1 \%\) \\
\hline Asteraceae & Helianthus occidentalis & Fewleaf Sunflower & 8 & \(2.1 \%\) \\
\hline Asteraceae & Solidago speciosa & Showy Goldenrod & 5 & \(2.1 \%\) \\
\hline Asteraceae & Solidago juncea & Early Goldenrod & 3 & \(0.0 \%\) \\
\hline Fabaceae & Tephrosia virginiana & Virginia Tephrosia & 10 & \(0.0 \%\) \\
\hline Commelinaceae & Tradescantia ohiensis & Bluejacket & 5 & \(0.0 \%\) \\
\hline
\end{tabular}
entailed dividing each \(5 \mathrm{~m}\) by \(5 \mathrm{~m}\) plot into quarters, with two researchers each estimating the cover of two quarters. During both years, each researcher consistently examined the same two quarters within each plot. To standardize visual estimates among researchers, we referred to published area charts (Anderson 1986), and used \(0.1 \mathrm{~m}^{2} \mathrm{PVC}\) frames as a standard area reference. Following data collection, we calculated the relative percent cover \((p)\) of each species on each plot by dividing the summed total cover of each species by the summed total cover of the plot.
\section*{Data Analysis}
Using the relative percent cover calculated for each year, we determined plot diversity using the Shannon index of diversity:
\[
1) \mathrm{H}^{\prime}=-\sum p_{i} \log p_{i}
\]
and Simpson's index of diversity:
2) \(\mathrm{D}=1-\Sigma p_{i}^{2}\)
(McCune and Grace 2002). As recommended by Peet (1974), we used the exponential of \(\mathrm{H}^{\prime}\) for analysis, as this indicates the functional number of species in the sample. Interpretations of the results remain the same, with higher values indicating higher diversity. Simpson's index has a range from zero, with a single species present, to one, maximum diversity (Peet 1974). Estimates of percent cover have been used successfully in previous studies to calculate these diversity indices (Potvin and Vasseur 1997, Tilman et al. 1997), and avoid errors resulting from miscounting clonal species if density had been used.
To evaluate community quality, we calculated the mean coefficient of conservatism (C), and a floristic quality index (FQI) for each plot to distinguish among treatment combinations containing ubiquitous native plants and those containing species more likely to occur in undisturbed native plant communities. These methods rely on coefficients of conservatism specific to Michigan (MDNR 2001), ranging from zero, representing ubiquitous native species, to ten, representing highly conserved native species (Talf et al. 1997). FQI was calculated for each plot by multiplying the \(\overline{\mathrm{C}}\) for the plot by the square root of the number of native species on the plot (Pakcard and Mulet 1997). Native tree and shrub species are not part of the target prairie community and were excluded from FQI and \(\overline{\mathrm{C}}\) analysis.
For analyses of community composition, we classified species into one of six groups: non-native forbs, knapweed, non-native grasses, native graminoids, native forbs, and tree/ shrub species. The non-native forbs group does not include knapweed. As the dominant invasive species and a focus of our research, knapweed was classified independently. Following this classification, we calculated the relative percent cover for each group by summing the relative percent