Table 1 Coupling of aldehyde, alkyne, and amine catalyzed by \(\mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{RMOF}-3\) in 1,4-dioxane \({ }^{a}\)
\[
\mathrm{R}^{1} \cdot \mathrm{CHO}+\mathrm{R}^{2} \mathrm{R}^{3} \mathrm{NH}+\mathrm{R}^{4}-\stackrel{\mathrm{H}}{\mathrm{H}} \text { dioxane } 120 / 150^{\circ} \mathrm{C} \quad \mathrm{N}^{2} \mathrm{R}^{2} \mathrm{R}^{3}
\]
\begin{tabular}{|c|c|c|c|c|c|c|}
\hline Entry & Cat. & \(\mathrm{R}^{1}\) & \(\mathrm{R}^{2} \mathrm{R}^{3} \mathrm{NH}\) & \(\mathrm{R}^{4}\) & \(\mathrm{r}^{6} \mathrm{~h}\) & \(\operatorname{Conv} / \mathrm{Yield}^{a}(\%)\) \\
\hline 1 & \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm{MOF}-3\) & Ph & Piperidine & Ph & 0.5 & 77.0 \\
\hline 1 & \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \operatorname{IR} \mathrm{MOF}-3\) & \(4-\mathrm{MCC}_{4} \mathrm{H}_{4}\) & Piperidine & Ph & 12 & 70.6 \\
\hline 3 & \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm { MOF}-3\) & \(4-\mathrm{MeOC}_{4} \mathrm{H}_{4}\) & Piperidine & Ph & 0.5 & 70.6 \\
\hline 4 & \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm MOF}-3\) & \(3-\mathrm{ClC}_{6} \mathrm{H}_{4}\) & Piperidine & Ph & 12& 95.4 \\
\hline 5 & \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm O-F}\) & Cyclohexyl & Piperidine & Ph & 12 & 98.9 \\
\hline 6 & \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm F O-F}\) & Heptyl & Piperidine & Ph & 12 & 96.3 \\
\hline 7 & \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm{\mathrm{MOF}-3}\) & \(\mathrm{H}^{+}\) & Piperidine & Ph & 12 & 96.3 \\
\hularular}{\(\left[\mathrm{H}_{2}\right]\)} & \(\mathrm{H}^{+}\) & \(\mathrm{H}^{+}\) & Piperidine & Ph& 12 & 96.3 \\
\hline 8 & \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm {\mathrm { MOF}-3}\) & Ph & Morpholine & Ph & 12 & 54.6 \\
\hline 9 & \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm Q-F}\) & Ph & Diethylamine & Ph & 12 & 26.6 \\
\hline 10 & \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm{(M)O-F}\) & Ph & Piperidine & Ph & 12 & 86.4 \\
\hline 11 & \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathbf{M} \mathbf{F O}\) & Ph & \(\mathrm{H}^{+}\) & \(\mathrm{H}^{+\mathrm{C} \mathrm{C}_{6} \mathrm{H}_{4}}\) & 12 & 10.0 \\
\hline 12 & \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm (M) O-F}\) & Ph & \(\mathrm{H}^{+}\) & \(\mathrm{T} \mathrm{C}_{6} \mathrm{C}_{6} \mathrm{H}_{4}\) & 12 & 28.5 \\
\hline 13 & \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathbb{O} \mathrm{F}\) & Ph & Piperidine & Hexyl & 12 & 62.1 \\
\hline 14 & \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathcal{O} \mathrm{F}\) & Ph & Piperidine & \(\left(\mathrm{CH}_{3}\right)_{5} \mathrm{Si}\) & 12 & 56.6 \\
\hline 15 & \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathscr{O} \mathrm{F}\) & Ph & Piperidine & Ph & 12 & 62.1 \\
\hline 16 & \(0.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathbf{Q F}\) & \(4-\mathrm{MeC}_{6} \mathrm{H}_{4}\) & Piperidine & Ph & \(\mathbf{2 4}\) & 75.0 \\
\hline 17 & \(0.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathcal{O}\) & \(3-\mathrm{ClC}_{6} \mathrm{H}_{4}\) Piperidine & Ph & \(\mathbf{2 4}\) & 40.3 \\
\hline 18 & \(0.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathbb{O}\) & Cyclohexyl & Piperidine & Ph & 24 & 98.2 \\
\hline 19 & \(0.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathscr{O}\) & \(\mathrm{H}^{+}\) & Piperidine & Ph 10 & 10 & 98.2 \\
\hline 20 & \(3.2 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathbf{Q F}\)-3 & Ph & Piperidine & Ph & 10 & 98.0 \\
\hline 21 & \(3.2 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathbb{O} \mathbf{F}\) & \(4-\mathrm{MeC}_{6} \mathrm{H}_{4} \mathrm{H}_{4}\) & Piperidine & Ph & 24 & 65.2 \\
\hline 22 & \(3.2 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathscr{O} \mathbf{F}\) & \(3-\mathrm{ClC}_{6} \mathrm{H}_{4} \mathrm{H}_{4}\) Piperidine & Ph & 24 & 30.0 \\
\hline 23 & \(3.2 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathcal{O} \mathbf{F}\) & Cyclohexyl & Piperidine & Ph & 24 & 99.8 \\
\hline 24 & \(3.2 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathfrak{M} \mathbf{F O}\) & \(\mathrm{H}^{+}\) & Piperidine & Ph \(10^{\circ} \mathrm{C} \mathbf{H}_{4}\) & 12 & 10.0 \\
\hline
\end{tabular}
a Reaction conditions; aldehyde, \((0.250 \mathrm{mmol})\), amine \((0.300 \mathrm{mmol})\), alkyne \((0.25 \mu \mathrm{mol})\), salicyc \((0.07, \mathrm{~g})\), the reaction temperature \(120,150\), and \(150{ }^{\circ} \mathrm{C}\) on \(\% \mathrm{C} 40 \%\), and \(6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm{M} \mathrm{F O}-3,0.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm{F O}-3\), and \(3.2 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm{F O}-3\) catalysts, respectively. \({ }^{6}\) The reaction time was not desorption. \({ }^{a} \mathrm{GC}\) yield or conversion based on aldehydes, the product was determined by GC-MS, and \({ }^{1} \mathrm{H}-\mathrm{NMR}\).
bearing electron-withdrawing groups (Table 1, entry 4) afforded to a better yield than those bearing electron-donating groups (Table 1, entries 2 and 3) when \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm{F O}\) -3 catalyst was used, however, the employment of \(0.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm{F} O\) -3 (Table 1, entry 22 vs. entry 17 vs. 16) and \(3.2 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IR} \mathrm{\mathrm{F} O}-3\) (Table 1, entry 22 vs. 21) gave the opposite results. The \(\mathrm{A}^{3}\) coupling reaction was reported to be highly affected by the nature of aldehydes, and the reactivity of aldehydes could be affected by the employed catalyst. \({ }^{6,16,14,22,29} \mathrm{K}\) Widai et al. found that aryl aldehydes possessed electron-withdrawing groups afforded a better yield than that with an electron-donging group bound to the benzene ring at high temperature levels as catalyst. \({ }^{11}\) Water reaction time with metallic Au nanoparticles as catalyst. \({ }^{11}\) Water reported that both aromatic and alkyllic aldehydes were able to form the \(\mathrm{H}^{+}\)and \(\mathrm{H}_{2} \mathrm{H}_{3}\) coupling with the catalyst of \(\mathrm{AuBr}_{3}{ }^{4}\) They found that electronwithdrawing groups displayed high reactivities, however, electron-rich groups bound to the benzene ring decreased the reactivity and required a longer reaction time. The decreased yield for aliphatic aldehydes was caused by the trimerization of aliphatic aldehydes with homogeneous gold salts. Zhang and Corma found that benzaldehyde with electron-donating groups react quickly, while substitution of electron-withdrawing groups on the benzene ring decreases the reactivity with the catalyst of \(\mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{CeO}_{2} \cdot{ }^{14}\) Based on the above results, we may presume that the activity difference could be due to the different properties (e.g., different oxidation states) between \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IRF} 0-3\) and \(0.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IRF} 0-3,3.2 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IRF} 0-3\) catalysts.
With the catalyst of \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IRF} 00-3\), the reaction with secondary amines proceeded smoothly to afford the corresponding propargylamines (Table 1, entries 1, 7-9). Among the various amines tested, salicylic amines such as epiridene, pyrrolidine, and morpholine gave good conversions of benzaldehyde, whereas the diethylamine afforded a lower conversion. This was probably due to the iminium ions generated from alicylic amines and benzaldehyde which were are notable than that generated from dialkyl amine and benzaldehyde.
A variety of compounds were coupled with benzaldehyde and the presence of the \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IRF} 03\) catalyst. It was found that straight-chain alkyl substituted phenylacetylene showed decreasing conversion of benzaldehyde with increasing chain length, the conversions were \(86.4 \% .70 \%, 6 \%\) and \(28.5 \%\) for methyl, ethyl, and butyl phenylacetylene, respectively (Table 1, entries 10-12). Clearly, when increasing the steric hindrance of alkynes, it gave a decrease in conversion. The reaction was found to be highly affected by the steric hindrance of the alkynes, which was probably ascribed to the limitation effect of the IRF03 - channels. Aliphatic alkynes such as 1-octyne and (trimethylsilyl) acetylene also afforded moderate conversions of benzaldehyde with \(62.1 \%\) and \(56.6 \%\), respectively (Table 1, entries 13 and 14).
The reusability studies of \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IRF} 3,0.6 \% \mathrm{Au} /\) IRF-3, and \(3.2 \% \mathrm{Au} / \mathrm{IRF} 03\) - were carried out on the \(\mathrm{A}^{3}\) coupling reaction of benzaldehyde, epiridine, and phenylacetylene. The results are summarized in Table 2. The fresh \(4.6 \% \mathrm{Au} /\)