entailed dividing each   $5\,\textrm{m}$   by   $5\,\textrm{m}$    plot into quarters, with two researchers each estimating the cover of two  quarters. During both years, each  researcher consistently examined the  same two quarters within each plot.  To standardize visual estimates among  researchers, we referred to published  area charts (Anderson 1986), and used   $0.1\;\mathrm{m}^{2}$   PVC frames as a standard area  reference. Following data collection,  we calculated the relative percent  cover   $(\boldsymbol{\mathscr{p}}_{i})$  ) of each species on each plot  by dividing the summed total cover  of each species by the summed total  cover of the plot.  

Using the relative percent cover calculated for each year, we determined  plot diversity using the Shannon index  of diversity:  

and Simpson’s index of diversity:  

(McCune and Grace 2002). As recommended by Peet (1974), we used the  exponential of  $\mathrm{H}^{\prime}$   for analysis, as this  indicates the functional number of  species in the sample. Interpretations  of the results remain the same, with  higher values indicating higher diversity. Simpson’s index has a range from  zero, with a single species present, to  one, maximum diversity (Peet 1974).  Estimates of percent cover have been  used successfully in previous studies  to calculate these diversity indices  (Potvin and Vasseur 1997, Tilman et  al. 1997), and avoid errors resulting  from miscounting clonal species if  density had been used.  

To evaluate community quality, we  calculated the mean coefficient of conservatism   $(\overline{{\mathrm{C}}})$  , and a floristic quality  index (FQI) for each plot to distinguish among treatment combinations  containing ubiquitous native plants  and those containing species more  likely to occur in undisturbed native  plant communities. These methods  rely on coefficients of conservatism  specific to Michigan (MDNR 2001),  ranging from zero, representing ubiquitous native species, to ten, representing highly conserved native species  (Taft et al. 1997). FQI was calculated  for each plot by multiplying the C  for the plot by the square root of the  number of native species on the plot  (Packard and Mutel 1997). Native tree  and shrub species are not part of the  target prairie community and were  excluded from FQI and C analysis.  

For analyses of community composition, we classified species into  one of six groups: non-native forbs,  knapweed, non-native grasses, native  graminoids, native forbs, and tree/ shrub species. The non-native forbs  group does not include knapweed.  As the dominant invasive species and  a focus of our research, knapweed was  classified independently. Following  this classification, we calculated the  relative percent cover for each grouping by summing the relative percent  