than ameliorate the effects of Perceived Stress on SelfEsteem. A similar amp li cation effect appeared for OBS in the analysis of Depression. All signiﬁcant FFMQ correlations with psychological scales were in line with theoretical expectations, conﬁrming that each dimension of mindfulness operational i zed an adjusted form of self-functioning when examined alone. Amp li cation rather than the expected amelioration effects, therefore, presumably reﬂected intricacies in the dynamic interactions among these proposed selfregulatory processes. In addition, the NONJ factor did not correlate with DES and, perhaps most surprisingly, displayed a negative correlation with OBS. Overall, such ﬁndings conﬁrmed the need to further examine complexities in mindfulness that have already appeared in the recent research literature (e.g., Feltman, Robinson, & Ode, 2009).  

Failure of all FFMQ factors to correlate positivity with each other suggested some degree of independence in how at least some aspects of mindfulness function in Iran. Baer et al. (2006) similarly reported no positive correlation between OBS and NONJ in one of their American samples. A negative NONJ correlation with OBS and its weaker and less consistent relationships with the other psychological scales indicated that this factor in particular may need to be the focus of future Iranian research. Specifically, items in this factor may express problematic ideas within the Iranian Muslim cultural context. Two NONJ statements say, for example, “I tend to evaluate whether my perceptions are right or wrong” (reverse scored) and “I make judgments about whether my thoughts are good or bad” (reverse scored). Muslim beliefs in, for example, self-control might make it difﬁcult for Iranians to selfreport the mindfulness of NONJ by rejecting such claims. In short, future research should examine the religious implications of NONJ in Iranian Muslims.  

Integrative Self-Knowledge proved to be an especially noteworthy self-regulatory process. Only this measure, alone or in interaction with Self-Control, displayed the expected mediation effects with all four dependent variables. Self-Control failed to be implicated in selfregulation only in the mediation of Anxiety. Additional studies clearly should analyse these two measures in further attempts to understand self-regulation. The one signiﬁcant interaction between these two mediators did suggest that an especially self-insightful self-control might sometimes make unique contributions to selfregulation, but then again, the fact that only one such interaction proved to be signiﬁcant also implied that any such contributions might be limited. That Integrative Self-Knowledge only sometimes interacts with SelfControl to produce signiﬁcant effects was also apparent in the previous examination of Iranian religious and spiritual functioning (Ghorbani, Watson, Rezazadeh, & Cunningham, 2011).  

Conclusions of this study must of course be conditioned by an awareness of its limitations. The focus of this investigation was on self-regulation broadly speaking, and statistical analyses consequently controlled for gender and age. Possible inﬂuences of these two controlled variables may be an important future research question.  

In addition, the student research participants of this study were not representative of either the Iranian population or of other societies. In theory, the multiprocess model of self-regulation should apply crossculturally, and con rm ation of that expectation will require testing in a broader range of cultural contexts. In such research, it presumably will be important to establish the measurement invariance of instruments across societies and not just across genders as was the case with the FFMQ in the present study. Previous ﬁndings have established the measurement invariance of the Integrative Self-Knowledge Scale across Iranian  