# Sinister Innovations: Beware the Co-optation of Clinical Ethics Consultation  

# LISA M. RASMUSSEN  

Department of Philosophy, University of North Carolina—Charlotte, 9201 University City Boulevard, Charlotte, North Carolina 28223, USA  $e$  -mail: lrasmuss@email.uncc.edu  

# 1. Introduction  

Despite generations of attack by philosophers, many moral problems remain intractable. Distributive justice is one such problem: how ought scarce resources to be apportioned? Answering this deceptively simple question in diﬀerent ways, such as suggesting giving to people who need the goods in question, who deserve them, or who can pay for them, can give rise to radically diﬀerent types of state governments. A choice about resource allocation can therefore have profound and persistent conse- quences. Any solution, therefore, which dissolves a particular challenge of distributive justice seems welcome.  

Thomas Magnell observes that if we foster the conditions for inno- vation, we might be able to avoid diﬃcult moral questions of distributive justice that arise in the case of socially constrained or collapsing goods. In fact, he suggests, it is precisely our ability to innovate to avoid a diﬃcult moral question that gives moral value to innovation. Were we to take only this much away from Magnell  s argument, however, we might be left with the impression that the end, innovatively dissolving a problem of distributive justice, renders means irrelevant. Magnell explicitly recog- nizes this problem: ‘‘Other moral considerations would certainly be rel- evant in an overall moral assessment. The exchange of a collapsing good for a socially unconstrained good might not be desirable, all things considered, in a particular case, despite its general moral advantages.  

However, he does not elaborate on what other considerations would have merit in evaluating the desirability of a particular innovation. Let us consider an example of an innovation which, though it may aid in dis- solving a distribution challenge, nevertheless ought not to be embraced as an innovation.  

# 2. The Problem of Limited Resources  

Most resources that we are interested in, morally speaking, are limited, or to use Magnell  s term, socially constrained. Perhaps more aptly put, it is when resources are limited that we have a moral interest in them, as the question of distribution must then be answered. Magnell isolates a par- ticular kind of socially constrained good, what he calls a collapsing good. In cases of socially unconstrained goods, such as bone-setting in Mag- nell  s example, each instance of the use of a resource is valuable, no matter how many people use it. However, in collapsing goods, such as the use of antibiotics, ‘‘The good continues only up to a point, a threshold of use, and then plummets with undesirable and possibly devastating 2   results.’’ It is not the case that no matter how many people use antibi- otics, the good in question remains good. Instead, more use breeds more resistant strains of bacteria, which might then overwhelm a population, resulting in the collapse of the good in question that was initially sought.  

Because of the danger of a precipitous collapse, we must control how much antibiotic is used. Magnell identiﬁes four ways in which this might be done: moral suasion, regulation, a pricing mechanism, and innovation. While the ﬁrst three of these are promising, each is also limited in scope and likelihood of success. It is only innovation, Magnell points out, which has the potential to avoid the collapse altogether by dissolving the problem of scarcity. For example, if we could genetically engineer anti- biotics against new strains of bacteria as soon as they mutated, our use of antibiotics would no longer render it a collapsing good, and we would not have to adopt any of the ﬁrst three methods to limit their use. The innovation of genetic engineering of antibiotics would solve the problem of a collapsing good and enable unconstrained beneﬁt.  

Magnell is right here, and it is crucial to appreciate our ability to innovate to solve some moral problems of distributive justice. As Magnell observes, because solving moral problems has moral value, and because innovation has this potential, we ought morally to nurture the conditions that foster such innovation. It is an empirical question what best fosters innovation, but the answer seems to be free markets.  

Markets do not deliver unbridled good, however. Embracing free markets is often incorrectly taken to be embracing the claim that the value of anything is reducible to its market value. The embrace of innovation runs the risk of being similarly misunderstood as the embrace of whatever decreases our use of resources, regardless of secondary concerns. It is therefore important to explicate some of the side-constraints on the embrace of innovation, and it is here that we should explore Magnell  s claim further.  

The most direct manner in which innovation dissolves a moral prob- lem is when there is a scarce resource, but innovation eliminates the scarcity by enabling us to discover more of the resources already in use, or replacing old, scarce resources with diﬀerent, plentiful ones, or elimi- nating the need for the resource in question altogether. This works both for collapsing goods and for more general instances of scarcity. For example, our tenuous position with respect to the consumption of foreign oil is improved with the discovery of new supplies, the replacement of oil with other power sources, or a decrease in the machines that require it.  

One area of high consumption in medicine is end-of-life care. One way of decreasing the cost of end-of-life care is limiting it in a variety of ways. If a health insurance company limits its coverage of certain treatments for patients over a particular age, or the length of hospital stay it covers, this is hardly innovation. Instead, this is the pricing mechanism Magnell discusses as one of the ways of handling problems of distributive justice. Most people would agree that this is not a successful or welcome strategy. What if, however, the limiting of end-of-life care is freely chosen by patients or family members themselves? An innovative strategy on the part of hospitals might be to embrace whatever fostered such decisions. As it turns out, there is a mechanism in place which appears to save hospitals a fair amount of money by doing just this: ethics consultation.  

# 3. Empirical Support for Ethics Consultation as Cost-saving  

The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations requires that an accredited hospital ‘‘addresses ethical issues in providing 3   patient care.’’ In practice, this can be satisﬁed by anything from a tele- phone call to the Risk Management department to a consultation by a standing Ethics Committee in the Hospital. Most often such issues arise when there is a conﬂict between healthcare providers and patients or their family members regarding care decisions, and unsurprisingly, this fre- quently involves care at the end of life. In the case of such a conﬂict, an ethics consultation may be requested.  

The purpose of an ethics consultation is generally to resolve whatever conﬂict motivated the request. Just how this is done is unsettled, both func- tionally and in substance. Functionally, it may be a single consultant, a small team, or an entire ethics committee who investigate and propose a solution. Substantively, there is even more latitude: the possible goals of ethics con- sultation are diverse and sometimes incompatible. For example, if ethics consultants are patient advocates, they cannot at the same time be mediators or risk managers. Nevertheless, there seems to be broad consensus that a primary function of ethics consultations is to identify the patient  s wishes and ensure that relevant parties understand and respect these wishes. This func- tion follows directly from the legally and morally enshrined respect for autonomy and self-determination that is every patient  s right.  

Recent studies suggest that consultations can also save a considerable amount of money for health care institutions. Their authors report a range of cost savings to hospitals, exclusive of the costs of ethics con-   sultation. G. Daly reports savings of   $\mathbb{S}14{,}240$   per day. T. Gilmer et al.   report savings of  $\mathbb{S}157{,}380$   per year. B. Heilicser et al. report savings of    $\S288{,}827$   over six months. In Daly  s study the costs of ethics consultation were not mentioned. In the study performed by Gilmer et al. the savings were approximately equal to the estimated costs of the ethics consultation service. In the study performed by Heilicser et al. the six-month costs of the ethics consultation service were estimated to be  $\mathbb{S}12{,}000$  , conveying to the institution a net savings of   $\mathbb{S}276{,}827$   over six months. The methods of each study vary tremendously, but each study points in the direction of potential cost savings or at the least, breaking even with respect to the costs involved in ethics consultation.  

The great disparity of ethics consultation costs between the last two examples is noteworthy. Because models of consultation vary from hos- pital to hospital, in one institution consultation may be conducted entirely by physicians, nurses or other health care employees, in a second it may be a service provided by an independent contractor, and in a third the institution may employ a single, salaried, full-time consultant, usually someone with an advanced degree. Such approaches can make a con- siderable diﬀerence in the cost to the institution for carrying an ethics consultation service. Imagine an administrator of a large hospital with a ﬂourishing ethics consultation service which has been demonstrated to result in patient and provider satisfaction, another suggested measure of ethics consultation success. The most natural view such a person would have upon hearing these ﬁndings is, ‘‘I wonder whether we could save even more money if we expanded our consultation service?’’ An admin- istrator in a hospital that has only suﬀered the presence of a feeble ethics consultation service might suddenly embrace the idea of ethics consul- tation and encourage its growth. This is where the innovative step is taken: health care institutions may encourage greater use of ethics con- sultations as a cost-saving measure.  

# 4. The Sinister Innovation  

Here we have a case of a potentially sinister innovation: a method that promises to aid in the problem of scarcity of resources, medical care, by adopting a benign or beneﬁcial service, ethics consultation, to pursue ends that may conﬂict with the proper ends of the service. The innovation is not the service itself, but instead, the goals to which it is directed and the resulting measure of success. This is not an abstract possibility. Although some of the studies cited were probably preemptive in that the authors, many of them consultants themselves, knew that they would eventually be asked to provide a cost-beneﬁt analysis of their service, in at least one case the possibility of beginning a consultation service at an institution was partly predicated on cost analysis.  

The sinister aspect of this innovation will be discussed below. It is important to note ﬁrst, though, that for ﬁnancial reasons this may not be an innovation to be embraced. The data might be inaccurate or mis- leading, and bioethics consultation might not be a net savings. As Ann Mills, Patricia Tereskerz and Walt Davis point out, there are opportunity costs even if the consultants are already paid members of the institution, 8   and these costs are not calculated in the studies cited.   For example, if a hospital bioethics consultant is a physician, each period of time spent on bioethics consultations is time spent away from patients. Since there is no compensation from insurance companies for bioethics consultations, whereas there are for patient visits, the opportunity to make more money for the hospital is lost to the bioethics consultation. Additionally, as the authors of the studies themselves often acknowledge, the sample sizes were small and it is diﬃcult to calculate counterfactual intensive care unit costs. It is at least as diﬃcult to determine the appropriate measure of eﬀectiveness. J.M. Craig and Thomas May point out that assuming ‘‘treatments provided to patients who did not survive to discharge’’ were not beneﬁcial is problematic, because many treatments ought to be con- sidered beneﬁcial even if the patient dies in the hospital. Further, the question of whether adequate, often expensive, palliative and other   comfort care was provided is undiscussed. Despite such caveats, how- ever, it is plausible that if consultations often result in a reduction of interventions at the end of life, following patient or family wishes, there are resulting savings to the institution.  

Even granting that there may be clear cost savings in ethics consul- tation, this is a contingent fact. The reason ethics consultations may be successful at saving money is because they make possible the reduction of expensive interventions at the end of life. They enable this reduction by ensuring that neither patients and families nor health care providers feel pressured to do something they do not want to do. Often, the patient  s choice is for less intervention than is medically suggested. However, this is the case only because the default or standard of care is for practitioners is to suggest almost any intervention that might be helpful, and in the absence of patient wishes to the contrary, this is the course that will be pursued. The cost savings realized by bioethics consultation, then, lies in the gap between the default treatment and the wishes of patients. This gap could close easily if patients and providers became more comfortable with a reduction of care at the end of life. Closing this gap would mean the elimination of the cost savings available in bioethics consultation, and render the service a cost rather than a savings. In fact, were the level of default treatment to decrease so that, for example, most people did not receive aggressive treatment at the end of life, ethics consultation might turn out to be costly in cases where the consultants argued for an indi- vidual  s right to more than the default treatment. Yet this recommenda- tion would be the result of the very same mechanism that formerly saved money: ensuring that the patient  s wishes are understood and respected. There are, therefore, practical reasons for hesitating to adopt bioethics consultations as a cost-cutting measure.  

More importantly, however, such an innovation would be sinister in that it might subvert the purpose of bioethics consultation and the principles to which it gave rise. There is substantial and increasing pres- sure to justify the costs of each facet of health care. Because the use of resources is most easily measured in dollars, the natural default justiﬁ- cation of a service is cost-eﬀectiveness or cost-reduction. The problem is that though perhaps bioethics can justify its existence like this, eventually it may be required to justify it thus, regardless of whether cost-eﬀective- ness is compatible with its goals.  

It is easy to imagine the innovative use of bioethics consultation being pursued aggressively, to the point where, as Mills, Tereskerz, and Davis point out,  

if the consultation is to be evaluated on the basis of cost saved, then attaining cost savings also becomes a goal of the consultation, and this goal may influence (or dominate) the original goals of the consultation. For instance, it is entirely conceivable that initiation of a consultation may change from voluntary to  being required in situations where savings can be realized. Or it may be that the process of consultation will change. For instance, there may be a shift from ‘‘facilitating’’ a decision to ‘‘urging’’ or ‘‘recommending’’ or possibly ‘‘imposing’’ a decision. It is entirely plausible that ethics consultants, under the guise of ‘‘facilitating’’ end-of-life decisions, could be used to encourage decisions that could result in costs sav- ings or could perhaps systematically fail to explain or explore alter- natives that could be more costly.  

In addition, they point out, the use of bioethics consultation as a cost- saving measure would rapidly engender distrust and threaten the very ability of bioethicists to be able to conduct consultations at all. Consul- tants might be taken as adherents of Woody Allen  s quip that ‘‘Death should not be seen as the end—but as a very eﬀective way to cut down expenses.’’  

It is not merely the possibility that consultation and consultants may be co-opted by introducing such an innovation that is sinister. The eﬀect of evaluating clinical ethics consultation on the basis of cost savings would render the principles ethics consultation is based on dispensable whenever they are not cost-eﬀective. Autonomy that is respected only when it is inexpensive to do so is autonomy denied. Though the precise goals of bioethics consultation are open to debate, it is clear that evalu- ating the service on the basis of cost-eﬃciency could destroy both the eﬀectiveness of consultation and the principles upon which it is based. Therefore, the innovative cooptation of ethics consultation is both a di- rectly self-defeating maneuver and destructive of other valuable ends. This example demonstrates a side-constraint on innovation. If it is true that price is not the only measure of value there will be goods and services which possess value in other important ways. Where innovative uses of such goods and services destroy the possibility of realizing such inde- pendent values, innovation may be inappropriate.  

# 5. Conclusion  

It is not merely because bioethics consultation is conducted under the auspices of health care institutions that it is susceptible to the pressure of demonstrating cost-eﬀectiveness. The goals of bioethics consultation are not codiﬁed among bioethics consultants. It is at least in part our lack of clarity regarding the appropriate goals and measures of success in bio- ethics consultation that invites investigation into the service  s cost-eﬀec- tiveness. The pressure to save or make money for health care institutions renders it increasingly important to be clear, thorough, and eﬀective in our defense of the appropriate goals of ethics consultation.  

# Notes  

1. Thomas Magnell, ‘‘Collapsing Goods in Medicine and the Value of Innovation,’’ Journal of Value Inquiry , Vol. 40, Nos. 2-3 (2006), p.164.

 2. Ibid, p.156.  

3. Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, Hospital Accreditation Standards, ‘‘Standard RI.1’’ (1997).

 4. See G. Daly, ‘‘Ethics and Economics,’’  Nursing Economics  18 (2000).

 5. See T. Gilmer, L. Schneiderman, H. Teetzel, J. Blustein, F. Cohn, R. Cranford, D. Dugan, G. Komatsu and E. Young, ‘‘The Costs of Nonbeneﬁcial Treatment in the Intensive Care Setting,’’  Health Aﬀairs  24 (2005).

 6. See B. Heilicser, D. Meltzer and M. Siegler, ‘‘The Eﬀect of Clinical Medical Ethics Consultation on Healthcare Costs,’’  Journal of Clinical Ethics  11 (2000).

 7. Ibid., p. 31

 8. See A. Mills, P. Tereskerz and W. Davis, ‘‘Is Evaluating Ethics Consultation on the Basis of Cost a Good Idea?’’  Cambridge Quarterly of Healthcare Ethics  14 (2005).

 9. J.M. Craig and T. May, ‘‘Evaluating the Outcomes of Ethics Consultation,’’ Journal of Clinical Ethics  17 (2006), p. 172.

 10. Mills, Tereskerz and Davis, op cit., p. 59.  