# The determinants of solvency in the United Kingdom life insurance market  

Yung-Ming Shiu  

To cite this article:  Yung-Ming Shiu (2005) The determinants of solvency in the United Kingdom life insurance market, Applied Economics Letters, 12:6, 339-344, DOI: 10.1080/13504850500092640  

To link to this article:   http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13504850500092640  

# The determinants of solvency in the United Kingdom life insurance market  

Yung-Ming Shiu  

Department of Finance, Tunghai University, Taiwan E-mail: yungming@mail.thu.edu.tw  

This paper examines the solvency determinants, including economic and ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors, in the United Kingdom life insurance market. Using panel data for 1986–1999, it is found that solvency was positively related to  bonds-to-total assets ,  equities-to-total assets , and  level of new business , but negatively related to  unexpected inﬂation ,  market competition ,  assets held to cover linked liabilities-to-total assets ,  life and general annuity reserves-to-total reserves ,  pension reserves-to-total reserves permanent health reserves-to-total reserves ,  other reserves-to-total reserves ﬁrm size , and  insurance leverage.  Based on panel data for the three subperiods, 1986–1990, 1990–1994, and 1994–1999, it was further found that solvency determinants changed from one epoch to another.  

# I. Introduction  

Solvency surveillance has been one of the most important responsibilities of insurance regulators. With a view to protecting policyholders from the consequences of insolvency of the insurer, many mechanisms such as the US Insurance Regulatory Information System and Financial Analysis and Surveillance Tracking System, have been developed to identify insurers of high insolvency risk. However, relatively little research has been conducted to empirically investigate the factors aﬀecting the ﬁnancial position of the insurer, especially within the UK context. Although the insurer insolvency rate in the UK has been low during the past two decades, it does not necessarily mean that the solvency of ﬁrms is high. In fact, UK life oﬃces have been in a low solvency environment over recent years. This highlights the importance of identifying solvency determinants.  

The main contributions of this paper are the following. First, a comprehensive research on solvency determinants using both statutory returns and economic data has not yet been conducted in the UK life insurance industry. Therefore, this study can be used to ﬁll the gap in the literature. Second, the paper investigates whether solvency determinants are the same across periods and contributes to the existing body of literature that has examined various aspects of insurer solvency. Third, this paper investigates the relationship between solvency and a number of factors, such as level of new business  and  termination ratio , which have not yet been used in previous studies. Fourth, the study provides insights into the factors aﬀecting the ﬁnancial strength of UK life oﬃces. By focusing on the UK life insurance industry, this study is able to control for cross-country and cross-industry diﬀerences in regulations. Fifth, the use of panel data models helps overcome some of the data and research method-based limitations such as inability to control for unobservable diﬀerences across individual insurers that might inﬂuence insurer sol- vency. Therefore, this research is of value to actu- aries, company executives and insurance regulatory authorities.  

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we brieﬂy discuss the previous literature on the determinants of solvency and performance. Section III presents theoretical considerations of model building. Section IV describes the data and Section   $\mathrm{V}$   presents empirical results. The ﬁnal section concludes the paper and draws some policy implications.  

# II. Literature Review  

Previous studies have shown that a range of market- related economic and ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors may have an impact on life insurer solvency. In a study exam- ining the relationship between economic predictors and insolvencies, Browne  et al . (1999) ﬁnd that life- health insurer insolvencies are statistically positively related to market competition. Moreover, Browne et al . (2001) report that life insurer performance is positively correlated to bond returns and negatively correlated to unexpected inﬂation. Adams and Buckle (2003) investigate the operational perfor- mance determinants in the Bermuda insurance mar- ket. They ﬁnd that leverage has a highly signiﬁcant positive eﬀect on performance and that performance is negatively related to underwriting risk and liquid- ity. The studies discussed above generally attempt to identify the ﬁrm-speciﬁc factors and those exogenous to individual insurance ﬁrms.  

As is evident, none of these studies examined the determinants of solvency of UK life insurers. The aims of this research are to ﬁnd out which factors aﬀected insurer solvency and to investigate whether these factors changed from one epoch to another.  

# III. Research Design and Variables  

This study employs ordinary least squares regression analysis and two panel data models (one-factor ﬁxed- eﬀects and random-eﬀects models) to test the relation between an insurer’s solvency and a number of vari- ables predicted to aﬀect the insurer’s ﬁnancial posi- tion. The ordinary least regression model is actually a simpliﬁcation of the one-factor ﬁxed-eﬀects model. The ﬁxed-eﬀects panel design allows the intercept to vary cross-sectionally. We can capture the poten- tial inﬂuence of omitted variables and control for unobservable interinsurer diﬀerences that might have an impact on solvency. If the true eﬀects are random, however, the use of a ﬁxed-eﬀects model may lead to ineﬃcient estimates. For the random- eﬀects model, it is assumed that the individual unit eﬀects are uncorrelated with the explanatory variables. The random-eﬀects model is believed to be more appealing if the sample is drawn from a large population and the researcher intends to extend his or her inference with respect to characteristics of the sampled individual units to the whole popu- lation in question. The one-factor ﬁxed-eﬀects and random-eﬀects models were estimated by parti- tioned ordinary least squares without overall constant and feasible two-step generalised least squares respectively (Greene, 2002), using LIMDEP (Version 8.0).  

The measure of the insurer’s solvency is  free asset ratio , which is one of the universally recognized sol- vency measures in the industry. Deﬁning  $X_{i t}$   to be the observable variables representing factors for insurer  $i$  at time    $t$   aﬀecting solvency for ﬁrm    $i$   at time    $t$  , the empirical framework proposed in the study takes the following form:  

$$
y_{i t}=\alpha_{i}+X_{k i t}\beta_{k}+\varepsilon_{i t}
$$  

where  $i$   is the index of company,    $k$   is the index of explanatory variables,  $t$   is the index of time periods,  $\alpha_{i}$   and  $\beta_{k}$   are parameters to be estimated, and  $\varepsilon_{i t}$   is the error component for company    $i$   at time    $t$   and is assumed to have mean zero,  $E[\varepsilon_{i t}]\!=\!0$   and constant variance  $E[\varepsilon_{i t}^{2}]\!=\!\sigma_{e}^{2}$  .  

The choice of explanatory variables is based on their theoretical relationship with the dependent variable. The following variables are hypothesized to have an eﬀect on the insurer’s level of solvency. A list of all variables and their deﬁnitions is found in Table 1.  

# IV. The Data  

Annual statutory returns data were obtained for 311 life oﬃces from 1986 through 1999 from SynThesys Life (Version 3.32), while the data on the economic variables were taken from Datastream. The returns data are unbalanced, mean- ing that data were not available for some insurers for the 14-year period. During the whole sample period, the industry underwent boom, recession and recovery, which were broadly represented by the three subperiods 1986–1990, 1990–1994, and 1995–1999. In the panel data sets, there are 2054 insurer-year observations over 14 years, whereas 773, 716, and 856 observations for the three sub- periods respectively. Summary statistics for the variables for the whole period and three subperiods are found in Table 2.  

<td><table  border="1"><thead><tr><td><b>Variable name</b></td><td><b>Definitions</b></td></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td colspan="2">Dependent variables</td></tr><tr><td>Free asset ratio (FAR)</td><td>Excess (deficiency) of available assets and implicit items over the required minimum margin divided by the sum of long-term insurance business assets and other than long-term insurance  business assets allocated towards long-term insurance business required minimum margin</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Explanatory variables</td></tr><tr><td>Unexpected inflation (UI)</td><td>The difference between UK inflation rate and interbank one-year middle rate</td></tr><tr><td>Interest rate level (IRL)</td><td>The UK ten-year government bond yield</td></tr><tr><td>Equity returns (ER)</td><td>The FTSE Ail Share-total return index</td></tr><tr><td>Market competition (MC)</td><td>The number of life insurance companies authorized whether by the regulator of the UK or another European Economic Area (EEA) Member State to carry on insurance business in the UK</td></tr><tr><td>Bonds-to-total assets (BTA)</td><td>The ratio of bonds to total admissible assets</td></tr><tr><td>Equities-to-total assets (ETA)</td><td>The ratio of equities and other shares to total admissible assets</td></tr><tr><td>Assets held to cover linked liabilities-to-total assets (ALLTA)</td><td>The ratio of assets held to cover linked liabilities to total admissible assets</td></tr><tr><td>Life and general annuity reserves-to-total reserves (LGARTR)</td><td>The ratio of life assurance and general annuity insurance reserves to total reserves</td></tr><tr><td>Pension reserves-to-total reserves (PRTR)</td><td>The ratio of pension insurance reserves to total reserves</td></tr><tr><td>Permanent health reserves-to-total reserves (PHRTR)</td><td>The ratio of permanent health insurance reserves to total reserves</td></tr><tr><td>Other reserves-to-total reserves (ORTR)</td><td>The ratio of other insurance reserves to total reserves</td></tr><tr><td>Life and general annuity premiums-to-total  premiums (LGAPTP)</td><td>The ratio of life assurance and general annuity insurance regular premiums plus one-tenth of single premiums to total regular premiums plus one-tenth of single premiums</td></tr><tr><td>Pension premiums-to-total premiums (PPTP)</td><td>The ratio of pension insurance regular premiums plus one-tenth of single premiums to total regular premiums plus one-tenth of single premiums</td></tr><tr><td>Permanent health premiums-to-total premiums (PHPTP)</td><td>The ratio of permanent health insurance regular premiums plus one-tenth of single premiums to total regular premiums plus one-tenth of single premiums</td></tr><tr><td>Other premiums-to-total premiums (OPTP)</td><td>The ratio of other insurance regular premiums plus one-tenth of single premiums to total regular premiums plus one-tenth of single premiums</td></tr><tr><td>Firm size (LOGTA)</td><td>The natural logarithm of grand total of admissible assets</td></tr><tr><td>Insurance leverage (IL)</td><td>The ratio of total reserves to shareholders' funds</td></tr><tr><td>Liquidity (LATL)</td><td>The ratio of the sum of cash, bonds, equities and other shares to total liabilities</td></tr><tr><td>Level of new business (LNB)</td><td>The ratio of new ordinary long term business regular premiums plus one-tenth of single premiums to total regular premiums plus one-tenth of single premiums</td></tr><tr><td>Expense ratio (EXR)</td><td>The ratio of total net expenses to total net regular premiums plus one-tenth of net single premiums</td></tr><tr><td>Non-linked termination ratio (NLTR)</td><td>The non-linked termination ratio</td></tr><tr><td>Linked termination ratio (LTR)</td><td>The linked termination ratio The ratio of the difference between total assets and total liabilities</td></tr><tr><td>Mismatch of durations (MD)</td><td>to shareholders' funds Composite insurer = 1, pure life insurer = 0</td></tr><tr><td>Organizational form (OF) Company type (CT)</td><td>Mutual life insurer = i, stock life insurer = 0</td></tr><tr><td>Organizational form (OF)</td><td>Mutual life insurer = i, stock life insurer = 0</td></tr></tbody></table></td>  

# V. Empirical Results  

The empirical results separately for the whole sample period 1986–1999 and three subperiods are shown in Table 3. Since the observations come from many cross-section companies, but the time periods are relatively limited, heteros ced asti city is a potential problem in the analysis. Therefore, we estimated the models using White’s heteros ced asti city corrected covariance matrix to derive heteros ced asti city- consistent estimates. In addition, due to the collinear- ity of regressors the ﬁxed-eﬀects models could not be estimated for the three subperiods, and accordingly Hausman tests could not be employed.  

<td><table  border="1"><thead><tr><td rowspan="2"><b>Variable</b></td><td colspan="2"><b>1986-1999</b></td><td colspan="2"><b>1986-1990</b></td><td colspan="2"><b>1990-1994</b></td><td colspan="2"><b>1994-1999</b></td></tr><tr><td><b>Mean</b></td><td><b>Std. dev.</b></td><td><b>Mean</b></td><td><b>Std. dev.</b></td><td><b>Mean</b></td><td><b>Std. dev.</b></td><td><b>Mean</b></td><td><b>Std. dev.</b></td></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>FAR</td><td>6.78</td><td>60.89</td><td>8.07</td><td>14.81</td><td>7.09</td><td>14.60</td><td>5.47</td><td>91.50</td></tr><tr><td>UI</td><td>-4.89</td><td>1.36</td><td>-6.21</td><td>1.39</td><td>-4.26</td><td>0.46</td><td>-4.10</td><td>0.64</td></tr><tr><td>IRL</td><td>8.56</td><td>1.82</td><td>10.27</td><td>0.80</td><td>9.32</td><td>,1.53</td><td>6.98</td><td>1.25</td></tr><tr><td>ER</td><td>1143.5</td><td>691.05</td><td>528.46</td><td>119.60</td><td>911.66</td><td>216.85</td><td>1800.49</td><td>552.50</td></tr><tr><td>MC</td><td>256.14</td><td>17.69</td><td>276.00</td><td>5.97</td><td>258.40</td><td>7.34</td><td>238.17</td><td>5.49</td></tr><tr><td>BTA</td><td>17.59</td><td>23.82</td><td>16.45</td><td>22.01</td><td>17.43</td><td>23.44</td><td>18.44</td><td>25.19</td></tr><tr><td>ETA</td><td>10.11</td><td>18.51</td><td>9.72</td><td>17.22</td><td>10.20</td><td>18.27</td><td>10.29</td><td>19.55</td></tr><tr><td>ALLTA</td><td>33.04</td><td>40.57</td><td>35.02</td><td>41.53</td><td>33.94</td><td>40.86</td><td>30.91</td><td>39.50</td></tr><tr><td>LGARTR</td><td>40.66</td><td>40.46</td><td>45.54</td><td>41.69</td><td>41.81</td><td>40.17</td><td>36.09</td><td>39.07</td></tr><tr><td>PRTR</td><td>28.43</td><td>36.90</td><td>27.58</td><td>36.7.</td><td>29.07</td><td>36.79</td><td>28.81</td><td>37.13</td></tr><tr><td>PHRTR</td><td>2.94</td><td>13.73</td><td>2.31</td><td>12.29</td><td>2.64</td><td>12.90</td><td>3.62</td><td>15.16</td></tr><tr><td>ORTR</td><td>0.14</td><td>1.86</td><td>0.07</td><td>1.21</td><td>0.08</td><td>1.29</td><td>0.23</td><td>2.40</td></tr><tr><td>LGAPTP</td><td>0.53</td><td>0.38</td><td>0.57</td><td>0.38</td><td>0.54</td><td>0.37</td><td>0.50</td><td>0.38</td></tr><tr><td>PPTP</td><td>0.42</td><td>0.38</td><td>0.40</td><td>0.38</td><td>0.42</td><td>0.38</td><td>0.45</td><td>0.39</td></tr><tr><td>PHPTP</td><td>0.04</td><td>0.15</td><td>0.03</td><td>0.14</td><td>0.04</td><td>0.15</td><td>0.05</td><td>0.16</td></tr><tr><td>OPTP</td><td>0.01</td><td>0.01</td><td>0.00</td><td>0.00</td><td>0.01</td><td>0.04</td><td>0.01</td><td>0.01</td></tr><tr><td>LOGTA</td><td>12.25</td><td>2.68</td><td>11.78</td><td>2.48</td><td>12.21</td><td>2.56</td><td>12.66</td><td>2.85</td></tr><tr><td>IL</td><td>24.72</td><td>254.54</td><td>22.79</td><td>278.59</td><td>23.22</td><td>206.56</td><td>25.86</td><td>245.79</td></tr><tr><td>LATL</td><td>333.54</td><td>10765.55</td><td>242.05</td><td>3701.70</td><td>105.58</td><td>2356.75</td><td>571.83</td><td>16307.04</td></tr><tr><td>LNB</td><td>25.19</td><td>45.62</td><td>27.96</td><td>52.30</td><td>22.47</td><td>35.66</td><td>24.21</td><td>44.76</td></tr><tr><td>EXR</td><td>98.11</td><td>2684.97</td><td>72.68</td><td>4315.99</td><td>112.51</td><td>1135.02</td><td>110.64</td><td>672.34</td></tr><tr><td>NLTR</td><td>9.75</td><td>47.53</td><td>9.34</td><td>19.66</td><td>9.64</td><td>24.37</td><td>9.77</td><td>67.60</td></tr><tr><td>LTR</td><td>8.80</td><td>34.51</td><td>8.67</td><td>20.00</td><td>8.83</td><td>17.85</td><td>8.54</td><td>47.39</td></tr><tr><td>MD</td><td>-16.44</td><td>433.28</td><td>-9.85</td><td>245.60</td><td>-28.63</td><td>619.14</td><td>-13.72</td><td>344.60</td></tr><tr><td>CT</td><td>0.11</td><td>0.31</td><td>0.11</td><td>0.31</td><td>0.11</td><td>0.31</td><td>0.11</td><td>0.31</td></tr><tr><td>OF</td><td>0.03</td><td>0.17</td><td>0.03</td><td>0.17</td><td>0.03</td><td>0.17</td><td>0.03</td><td>0.17</td></tr></tbody></table></td>


Notes : The deﬁnitions of the variables can be found in Table 1.  

F-tests for the overall statistical goodness-of-ﬁt of the empirical models are all signiﬁcant at the 0.001 level, conﬁrming that the ﬁtted models are better than a null model without explanatory variables. The adjusted    $R^{2}$    values range from 0.40 to 0.56. The results of LM and Hausman tests are presented at the bottom of Table 3, suggesting the most appropri- ate models are all one-factor random-eﬀects models.  

To simplify the exposition, the 1986–1999 results for each variable statistically signiﬁcant, at least, at the 0.05 level will be discussed, and so will the asso- ciated results for the three subperiods. The  free asset ratio  was positively related to  bonds-to-total assets , equities-to-total assets , and  level of new business , while  free asset ratio  was negatively related to  unex- pected inﬂation ,  market competition ,  assets held to cover linked liabilities-to-total assets ,  life and general annuity reserves-to-total reserves ,  pension reserves- to-total reserves ,  permanent health reserves-to-total reserves ,  other reserves-to-total reserves ,  ﬁrm size , and  insurance leverage.  

The estimates of  bonds-to-total assets ,  equities- to-total assets  were positive and signiﬁcant in all periods, suggesting that both bond and equity hold- ings are important factors in determining insurer solvency. The coeﬃcients on  level of new business were positive and signiﬁcant in the 14-year period, 1986–1999, in 1986–1990 and 1994–1999, but insig- niﬁcant in 1990–1994. This implies that over the longer term and in the boom and recovery years, life insurers acquiring more new business enjoyed higher solvency than those life oﬃces acquiring less new business.  

The estimates of  unexpected inﬂation  were mixed. In 1990–1994 and 1994–1999, the estimates were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. However, over the entire 14-year period and in 1986–1990, the estimates were negative and signiﬁcant. These results suggest that in the longer term and during the boom years of the late 1980s, unexpected high inﬂation adversely aﬀected ﬁrm solvency because real returns on assets were reduced. The coeﬃcient estimates of  market competition  were found to be negatively and signiﬁ- cantly related to solvency in the longer term and in the recovery of the late 1990s. This ﬁnding is consis- tent with that of Browne  et al . (1999) who argue that increased competition contributes to an increase in the probability of insolvency. This is possibly because market competition generally involves inappro- priate price-cutting and insurer solvency may be  

<td><table  border="1"><thead><tr><td><b>Variable</b></td><td><b>Expected sign</b></td><td><b>1986-1999</b></td><td><b>1986-1990</b></td><td><b>1990-1994</b></td><td><b>1994-1999</b></td></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td>Intercept</td><td></td><td>15.8354</td><td>465.5559***</td><td>24.7599</td><td>302.2254***</td></tr><tr><td>UI</td><td>-</td><td>-0.5731***</td><td>-0.7122***</td><td>0.6041</td><td>-0.0541</td></tr><tr><td>IR</td><td>+</td><td>0.0395</td><td>-0.2551*</td><td>-0.5660</td><td>-0.9376</td></tr><tr><td>ER</td><td>+</td><td>0.0001</td><td>0.9303***</td><td>0.0009</td><td>-0.0010</td></tr><tr><td>MC</td><td>-</td><td>-0.1049***</td><td>-0.0280</td><td>0.0676</td><td>-0.1718***</td></tr><tr><td>BTA</td><td>+</td><td>0.0389***</td><td>0.0641***</td><td>0.0960***</td><td>0.7962**</td></tr><tr><td>ETA</td><td>+</td><td>0.1541***</td><td>0.5172**</td><td>0.2275***</td><td>0.1773***</td></tr><tr><td>ALLTA</td><td>-</td><td>-0.0922***</td><td>0.0070***</td><td>-0.1167***</td><td>-0.1477***</td></tr><tr><td>LGARTR</td><td>-</td><td>-0.2588***</td><td>-0.4852***</td><td>-0.1706**</td><td>-0.3515***</td></tr><tr><td>PRTR</td><td>-</td><td>-0.2605***</td><td>-0.5115***</td><td>-0.2165***</td><td>-0.3461***</td></tr><tr><td>PHRTR</td><td>-</td><td>-0.2625***</td><td>-0.7336***</td><td>0.0113</td><td>-0.4489***</td></tr><tr><td>ORTR</td><td>-</td><td>-0.2624***</td><td>-0.1898</td><td>-0.2319</td><td>0.4210***</td></tr><tr><td>LGAPTP</td><td></td><td>76.4505</td><td>-373.0637***</td><td>13.6452</td><td>-158.2671**</td></tr><tr><td>PPTP</td><td></td><td>76.0476</td><td>-375.5134**</td><td>16.8302</td><td>-152.7832*</td></tr><tr><td>PHPTP</td><td></td><td>65.4730</td><td>-374.2385***</td><td>-8.1222</td><td>-159.6938**</td></tr><tr><td>OPTP</td><td></td><td>3.3149</td><td>-5821.5958</td><td>-68982.1109</td><td>-171.5499**</td></tr><tr><td>LOGTA</td><td>+</td><td>-2.5635***</td><td>-3.2345***</td><td>-1.3177**</td><td>=3.8309***</td></tr><tr><td>IL</td><td>-</td><td>-0.0042***</td><td>-0.0028***</td><td>-0.0052**</td><td>0.0017**</td></tr><tr><td>LATL</td><td></td><td>0.0001</td><td>0.0001</td><td>-0.0003</td><td>0.0001</td></tr><tr><td>LNB</td><td></td><td>0.0357***</td><td>0.0209***</td><td>-0.0114</td><td>0.0428***</td></tr><tr><td>EXR</td><td>-</td><td>0.0008</td><td>0.0022***</td><td>0.0047</td><td>-0.0006</td></tr><tr><td>NLTR</td><td>-</td><td>0.0008</td><td>-0.0216</td><td>-0.0192</td><td>0.0277***</td></tr><tr><td>LTR</td><td>-</td><td>-0.0412</td><td>-0.0175</td><td>-0.0619**</td><td>-0.0191*</td></tr><tr><td>MD</td><td>-</td><td>-0.0002</td><td>-0.0005*</td><td>0.0002</td><td>0.0005*</td></tr><tr><td>CT</td><td>+</td><td>-1.4181</td><td>-2.3896</td><td>-3.6955***</td><td>-8.0068***</td></tr><tr><td>OF</td><td>-2.1793</td><td>-1.1194</td><td>5.8087**</td><td>0.9356</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Number of observations</td><td>2054</td><td>773</td><td>716</td><td>856</td></tr><tr><td>Adjusted R?</td><td></td><td>0.4683</td><td>0.5622</td><td>0.4027</td><td>0.5583</td></tr><tr><td>F-statistic</td><td></td><td>73.31[0.0001***</td><td>40.65[0.00011***</td><td>20.28[0.0001]***</td><td>44.23[0.00011***</td></tr><tr><td>LM test</td><td></td><td>1348.88[0.0001]***</td><td>560.610.0001 *</td><td>400.15[0.0001j***</td><td>418.120.0001**</td></tr><tr><td>Hausman test</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></tbody></table></td>


Notes : 1. The deﬁnitions of the variables can be found in Table 1. 2.    $p$  -values are in brackets. 3. An upper-tail test is performed if the predicted sign is ‘  $"+"$  ; A lower-tail test is performed if the predicted sign is ‘‘  ’’; A two-tail test is performed if there is no predicted sign. 4.   $^{**}$  Signiﬁcant at the  $1\%$   level; \*\*signiﬁcant at the   $5\%$   level; \*signiﬁcant at the  $10\%$   level. 5. Large values of the LM statistic argued in favour of the panel data model against the ordinary least squares regression model. The models for the four periods are all one-factor random-eﬀects models.  

impaired. The estimates of  assets held to cover linked liabilities-to-total assets  were negative and signiﬁcant in all periods, suggesting that the solvency of the life oﬃce with more assets held to cover linked liabilities was lower than that of the ﬁrm with less. As expected, the  free asset ratio  was negatively and signiﬁcantly related to  reserves -related variables in most of the models. By deﬁnition, the higher the reserve the lower the  free asset ratio . Contrary to our expecta- tions, the coeﬃcients on the  ﬁrm size  variable were negative and signiﬁcant in all periods. These results provide support for the view of Warner (1977) that smaller ﬁrms have higher ﬁnancial distress costs than larger ones, and therefore small ﬁrms have stronger incentives to keep solvency high. Finally, the coeﬃcients on the variable representing an insurer’s  insurance leverage  also were negative and signiﬁcant in all periods, supporting the hypothesis that a life oﬃce with excess leverage is relatively likely to become insolvent.  

# VI. Conclusions  

Using 1986–1999 data, this article empirically identi- ﬁed the solvency determinants in the UK life insur- ance industry. From the results presented in the previous section, we conclude that solvency determi- nants changed from one epoch to another. The results arising out of a speciﬁc period may reﬂect the features of that period. This is the case especially during a time of rapid changes in the insurance mar-  

ket place. Overall, the results suggest that both economic and ﬁrm-speciﬁc variables may aﬀect insurer sol- vency. A number of variables have been identiﬁed and discussed. These variables are regarded as deter- minants of life insurer solvency. When monitoring insurer solvency insurance regulators should pay particular attention to these determinants due to their importance in determining solvency.  

The ﬁndings have, at least, two implications for the life insurance industry. The ﬁrst is that life oﬃces have to evaluate their exposure to unexpected inﬂation risk and insurance leverage risk, and pay attention to their asset allocation and reserves management. The second implication is that insights into the negative relation between solvency and market competition could help industry regulators and policy-makers to frame licensing regulations that limit the number of insurers. These implications may be helpful for those involved in monitoring insurer solvency.  

# References  

Adams, M. and Buckle, M. (2003) The determinants of operational performance in the Bermuda insurance market,  Applied Financial Economics ,  13 , 133–43. Browne, M. J., Carson, J. M. and Hoyt, R. E. (1999) Economic and market predictors of insolvencies in the life-health insurance industry,  The Journal of Risk and Insurance ,  66 , 643–59. Browne, M. J., Carson, J. M. and Hoyt, R. E. (2001) Dynamic ﬁnancial models of life insurers,  North American Actuarial Journal ,  5 , 11–26. Greene, W. H. (2002)  User’s Manual: Limdep Version 8.0 , Econometric Software Inc., USA. Warner, J. B. (1977) Bankruptcy costs: some evidence, Journal of Finance ,  32 , 337–47.  